Hardware security is a discipline originated from the cryptographic engineering and involves hardware design, access control, secure multi-party computation, secure key storage, ensuring code authenticity, measures to ensure that the supply chain that built the product is secure among other things.A hardware security module (HSM) is a physical computing device that safeguards and manages digital keys for strong authentication and provides cryptoprocessing. These modules traditionally come in the form of a plug-in card or an external device that attaches directly to a computer or network server.
Some providers in this discipline consider that the key difference between hardware security and software security is that hardware security is implemented using "non-Turing-machine" logic (raw combinatorial logic or simple state machines). One approach, referred to as "hardsec", uses FPGAs to implement non-Turing-machine security controls as a way of combining the security of hardware with the flexibility of software.Hardware backdoors are backdoors in hardware. Conceptionally related, a hardware Trojan (HT) is a malicious modification of electronic system, particularly in the context of integrated circuit.A physical unclonable function (PUF) is a physical entity that is embodied in a physical structure and is easy to evaluate but hard to predict. Further, an individual PUF device must be easy to make but practically impossible to duplicate, even given the exact manufacturing process that produced it. In this respect it is the hardware analog of a one-way function. The name "physical unclonable function" might be a little misleading as some PUFs are clonable, and most PUFs are noisy and therefore do not achieve the requirements for a function. Today, PUFs are usually implemented in integrated circuits and are typically used in applications with high security requirements.
Many attacks on sensitive data and resources reported by organizations occur from within the organization itself.

See also
Computer security compromised by hardware failure
Computer compatibility
Proprietary software
Free and open-source software
Comparison of open-source operating systems
Unified Extensible Firmware Interface ยง Secure Boot criticism
Trusted Computing
Computational trust
Fingerprint (computing)
Side-channel attack
Power analysis
Electromagnetic attack
Acoustic cryptanalysis
Timing attack
Supply chain security
List of computer hardware manufacturers
Consumer protection
Security switch
Vulnerability (computing)
Defense strategy (computing)
Turing completeness
Universal Turing machine
Finite-state machine
Automata theory

References
External links
Hardsec: practical non-Turing-machine security for threat elimination "Hardsec" concept outline Archived 2020-11-11 at the Wayback Machine