This is a tracking category for CS1 citations that have |title=Archived copy or |title=Archive copy.
Articles are listed in this category when Module:Citation/CS1 identifies template |title= parameters that use these place-holder titles.  'Archived copy' and 'Archive copy' are commonly provided by bots that are unable to identify the source's correct title.  Articles in this category should be corrected by replacing the place-holder titles with actual titles.  Pages in this category should only be added by Module:Citation/CS1.
Pages with this condition are automatically placed in Category:CS1 maint: archived copy as title.
By default, Citation Style 1 and Citation Style 2 error messages are visible to all readers and maintenance messages are hidden from all readers.
To display maintenance messages in the rendered article, include the following text in your common CSS page (common.css) or your specific skin's CSS page and (skin.css).
(Note to new editors: those CSS pages are specific to you, and control your view of pages, by adding to your user account's CSS code. If you have not yet created such a page, then clicking one of the .css links above will yield a page that starts "Wikipedia does not have a user page with this exact name." Click the "Start the User:username/filename page" link, paste the text below, save the page, follow the instructions at the bottom of the new page on bypassing your browser's cache, and finally, in order to see the previously hidden maintenance messages, refresh the page you were editing earlier.)

To display hidden-by-default error messages:

Even with this CSS installed, older pages in Wikipedia's cache may not have been updated to show these error messages even though the page is listed in one of the tracking categories. A null edit will resolve that issue.
To hide normally-displayed error messages:

You can personalize the display of these messages (such as changing the color), but you will need to ask someone who knows CSS or at the technical village pump if you do not understand how.
Nota bene: these css rules are not obeyed by Navigation popups. They also do not hide script warning messages in the Preview box that begins with "This is only a preview; your changes have not yet been saved".


== Notes ==