This hidden tracking category lists pages with CS1 citations that use |url-status=usurped or |url-status=unfit.
The keywords unfit and usurped are intended to identify original URLs that point to live sites that are inappropriate: spam, advertising, porn, etc.
A URL that returns a HTTP 404 error is not considered to be unfit and, in such cases, editors should set |url-status=dead.
CS1 and CS2 templates in pages listed in this category should be checked to ensure that the unfit and usurped keywords are correctly applied.
Only Module:Citation/CS1 should directly add pages to this category.
Pages with this condition are automatically placed in Category:CS1 maint: unfit URL.

Other values
|url-status=bot: unknown is tracked at Category:CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown.
|url-status=dead is not tracked.
|url-status=live is not tracked.
|url-status=deviated is not tracked.
|url-status=<anything else> is tracked at Category:CS1 errors: invalid parameter value.By default, Citation Style 1 and Citation Style 2 error messages are visible to all readers and maintenance messages are hidden from all readers.
To display maintenance messages in the rendered article, include the following text in your common CSS page (common.css) or your specific skin's CSS page and (skin.css).
(Note to new editors: those CSS pages are specific to you, and control your view of pages, by adding to your user account's CSS code. If you have not yet created such a page, then clicking one of the .css links above will yield a page that starts "Wikipedia does not have a user page with this exact name." Click the "Start the User:username/filename page" link, paste the text below, save the page, follow the instructions at the bottom of the new page on bypassing your browser's cache, and finally, in order to see the previously hidden maintenance messages, refresh the page you were editing earlier.)

To display hidden-by-default error messages:

Even with this CSS installed, older pages in Wikipedia's cache may not have been updated to show these error messages even though the page is listed in one of the tracking categories. A null edit will resolve that issue.
To hide normally-displayed error messages:

You can personalize the display of these messages (such as changing the color), but you will need to ask someone who knows CSS or at the technical village pump if you do not understand how.
Nota bene: these css rules are not obeyed by Navigation popups. They also do not hide script warning messages in the Preview box that begins with "This is only a preview; your changes have not yet been saved".


== Notes ==