The Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS; Chinese: 中国科学院) is the national academy for natural sciences and the highest consultancy for science and technology of the People's Republic of China. It is the world's largest research organization, with 100 research institutes, 3 universities, 69 thousand full-time employees, and 79 thousand graduate students. It has been consistently ranked among the top research organizations around the world.The Chinese Academy of Sciences has historical origins in the Academia Sinica during the Republican era and was formerly also known by that name until the 1980s. The academy functions as the national scientific think tank and academic governing body, providing advisory and appraisal services on issues stemming from the national economy, social development, and science and technology progress. It is headquartered in Beijing, with affiliate institutes throughout China. It has also created hundreds of commercial enterprises, Lenovo being one of the most famous. 
CAS has been ranked the No. 1 research institute in the world by Nature Index since the list's inception in 2014 by Nature Portfolio. It was the most productive institution publishing articles on sustainable development indexed in Web of Science from 1981 to 2018 among all universities and research institutions in the world. The academy also runs the University of Science and Technology of China and the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,  which is among the world's top five universities ranked by Nature Index.

Membership
Membership of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, also known by the title Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Chinese: 中国科学院院士), is a lifelong honor given to Chinese scientists who have made significant achievements in various fields. According to the Bylaws for Members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences adopted in 1992 and recently amended in 2014, it is the highest academic title in China. A formal CAS member must hold Chinese citizenship, although foreign citizens may be elected as CAS foreign academicians. Members older than 80 are designated as "senior members" and may no longer hold leading positions in the organization. Academicians of the Chinese Academy of Sciences carry an obligation to advance science and technology, to advocate and uphold scientific spirit, to develop a scientific and technological workforce, to attend member meetings and receive consultation and evaluation tasks, and to promote international exchanges and cooperation. Academicians can give suggestions and influence Chinese state policy related to science and technology.

Organization
Scientific integrity
On 26 February 2007, CAS published a Declaration of Scientific Ideology and set up a commission for scientific integrity to promote transparency, autonomy and accountability of scientific research in the country. Around that same time, the Ministry of Science and Technology also initiated measures to address misconduct in state-funded programs.

Publications
Together with the National Natural Science Foundation of China, the academy publishes the peer-reviewed academic journal, Science China (also known as Science in China). Science China comprises seven series:
A: Mathematics
B: Chemistry
C: Life Sciences
D: Earth Sciences
E: Technological Sciences
F: Information Sciences
G: Physics, Mechanics and AstronomyCAS also promotes the China Open Access Journals (COAJ) platform, a national variant of the international Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ).

Awards
Since 1999, the CAS has issued the annual State Preeminent Science and Technology Award, presented by the President of China to the recipient.

International cooperation
The Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth is a branch of CAS. The Institute of Remote Sensing and Digital Earth was a customer of Swedish Space Corporation (SSC), which provides data transmission services from satellites for a wide range of societal functions. It was reported by Reuters on 21 September 2020 that SSC decided not to renew the contracts with China to help operate Chinese satellites from SSC's ground stations, or seek new business with China.In 2023, the Pasteur Institute suspended ties with CAS.

See also
References
Citations
Sources
External links
 Media related to Chinese Academy of Sciences at Wikimedia Commons
Official website