Cliff Joslyn (born 1963) is an American mathematician, cognitive scientist, and cybernetician. He is currently the Chief Knowledge Scientist and Team Lead for Mathematics of Data Science at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Seattle, Washington, US, and visiting professor of Systems Science at Binghamton University (SUNY).

Biography
Cliff Joslyn studied at Oberlin College and received a BA in Cognitive Science and Mathematics, with High Honors in Cybernetics, in 1985. In 1987 he continued at the State University of New York at Binghamtonm studying under George Klir. In 1989 he received an MS, and in 1994 received a PhD, both in Systems Science, including the thesis "Possibilistic Processes for Complex Systems Modeling". 
From 1994 to 1996 he was an NRC Research Associate at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center. From 1996 to 2007 he was team leader at Los Alamos National Laboratory, where he led the Knowledge and Information Systems Science research team in the Modeling, Algorithms and Informatics (CCS-3) Group of the Computer, Computational, and Statistical Sciences Division. Since 2007 he is Chief Scientist for Knowledge Sciences  and the Team Leader for Mathematics of Data Science at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Seattle, Washington.
In 2022 Joslyn took a position as a visiting professor of Systems Science in the Systems Science and Industrial Engineering department at Binghamton University.
Joslyn is on the editorial boards  of the "International Journal of General Systems" and "Biosemiotics". 
In 1991 Joslyn was awarded the Sir Geoffrey Vickers' Award for Best Student Paper from the International Society for the Systems Sciences. In 1997 he received the Distinguished Performance Award: A Large Team Award for IRS Fraud Detection Projects, Los Alamos National Laboratory.

Work
Joslyn's research interests extend from "order theoretical approaches to knowledge discovery and database analysis to include computational semiotics, qualitative modeling, and generalized information theory, with applications in computational biology, infrastructure protection, homeland defense, intelligence analysis, and defense transformation".

Principia Cybernetica
Principia Cybernetica is an international organization in the field of cybernetics and systems science focused on the collaborative development of a "computer-supported evolutionary-systemic philosophy in the context of the transdisciplinary academic fields of Systems Science and Cybernetics".The organisation was initiated in 1989 by Joslyn, Valentin Turchin of the City College of New York, and Francis Heylighen from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel in Belgium.  These three scientists managed the project and worked together in an editorial board, which manages the collection, selection and development of the material, and the implementation of the computer system.

Knowledge and Information Systems Science
At Los Alamos Joslyn and his Knowledge and Information Systems Science team performed scientific research in "computational methods for the extraction, representation, organization, synthesis, discovery, and retrieval of knowledge in databases and information systems. They especially emphasize methods for representing semantic information, and hybrid methodologies combining statistical, numerical, and quantitative with symbolic, logical, and qualitative techniques".A primary application area is computational biology, and thus they had a close working relationship with the Computational Biology and Bioinformatics team. Other application areas include homeland defense, critical infrastructure protection, intelligence analysis, decision support environments, risk and reliability analysis, and defense transformation.

Publications
Joslyn has published numerous papers, articles and book chapters. A selection:
1994. Possibilistic Processes for Complex Systems Modeling. PhD Dissertation, SUNY-Binghamton, Systems Science.
1995. The Quantum of Evolution: Towards a Theory of Meta-System Transitions. With Francis Heylighen, and Valentin Turchin eds. Gordon and Breach.

See also
Collective intelligence
Meta-system

References
External links
Cliff Joslyn personal page.
Cliff Joslyn on Google Scholar.
Cliff Joslyn at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory.
About Cliff Joslyn on Principia Cybernetica Web