Communications security is the discipline of preventing unauthorized interceptors from accessing telecommunications in an intelligible form, while still delivering content to the intended recipients.
In the North Atlantic Treaty Organization culture, including United States Department of Defense culture, it is often referred to by the abbreviation COMSEC.  The field includes cryptographic security, transmission security, emissions security and physical security of COMSEC equipment and associated keying material.
COMSEC is used to protect both classified and unclassified traffic on military communications networks, including voice, video, and data.  It is used for both analog and digital applications, and both wired and wireless links.
Voice over secure internet protocol VOSIP has become the de facto standard for securing voice communication, replacing the need for Secure Terminal Equipment (STE) in much of NATO, including the U.S.A. USCENTCOM moved entirely to VOSIP in 2008.

Specialties
Cryptographic security: The component of communications security that results from the provision of technically sound cryptosystems and their proper use.  This includes ensuring message confidentiality and authenticity.
Emission security (EMSEC): The protection resulting from all measures taken to deny unauthorized persons information of value that might be derived from communications systems and cryptographic equipment intercepts and the interception and analysis of compromising emanations from cryptographic—equipment, information systems, and telecommunications systems.
Transmission security (TRANSEC): The component of communications security that results from the application of measures designed to protect transmissions from interception and exploitation by means other than cryptanalysis (e.g. frequency hopping and spread spectrum).
Physical security: The component of communications security that results from all physical measures necessary to safeguard classified equipment, material, and documents from access thereto or observation thereof by unauthorized persons.

Related terms
AKMS – the Army Key Management System
AEK – Algorithmic Encryption Key
CT3 – Common Tier 3
CCI – Controlled Cryptographic Item - equipment which contains COMSEC embedded devices
ACES – Automated Communications Engineering Software
DTD – Data Transfer Device
ICOM – Integrated COMSEC, e.g. a radio with built in encryption
TEK – Traffic Encryption Key
TED – Trunk Encryption Device such as the WALBURN/KG family
KEK – Key Encryption Key
KPK – Key production key
OWK – Over the Wire Key
OTAR – Over the Air Rekeying
LCMS – Local COMSEC Management Software
KYK-13 – Electronic Transfer Device
KOI-18 – Tape Reader General Purpose
KYX-15 – Electronic Transfer Device
KG-30 – family of COMSEC equipment
TSEC – Telecommunications Security (sometimes referred to in error transmission security or TRANSEC)
SOI – Signal operating instructions
SKL – Simple Key Loader
TPI – Two person integrity
STU-III – (obsolete secure phone, replaced by STE)
STE – Secure Terminal Equipment (secure phone)Types of COMSEC equipment:

Crypto equipment: Any equipment that embodies cryptographic logic or performs one or more cryptographic functions (key generation, encryption, and authentication).
Crypto-ancillary equipment: Equipment designed specifically to facilitate efficient or reliable operation of crypto-equipment, without performing cryptographic functions itself.
Crypto-production equipment: Equipment used to produce or load keying material
Authentication equipment:

DoD Electronic Key Management System
The Electronic Key Management System (EKMS) is a United States Department of Defense (DoD) key management, COMSEC material distribution, and logistics support system. The National Security Agency (NSA) established the EKMS program to supply electronic key to COMSEC devices in securely and timely manner, and to provide COMSEC managers with an automated system capable of ordering, generation, production, distribution, storage, security accounting, and access control.
The Army's platform in the four-tiered EKMS, AKMS, automates frequency management and COMSEC management operations. It eliminates paper keying material, hardcopy Signal operating instructions (SOI) and saves the time and resources required for courier distribution. It has 4 components:

LCMS provides automation for the detailed accounting required for every COMSEC account, and electronic key generation and distribution capability.
ACES is the frequency management portion of AKMS. ACES has been designated by the Military Communications Electronics Board as the joint standard for use by all services in development of frequency management and crypto-net planning.
CT3 with DTD software is in a fielded, ruggedized hand-held device that handles, views, stores, and loads SOI, Key, and electronic protection data.  DTD provides an improved net-control device to automate crypto-net control operations for communications networks employing electronically keyed COMSEC equipment.
SKL is a hand-held PDA that handles, views, stores, and loads SOI, Key, and electronic protection data.

Key Management Infrastructure (KMI) Program
KMI is intended to replace the legacy Electronic Key Management System to provide a means for securely ordering, generating, producing, distributing, managing, and auditing cryptographic products (e.g., asymmetric keys, symmetric keys, manual cryptographic systems, and cryptographic applications). This system is currently being fielded by Major Commands and variants will be required for non-DoD Agencies with a COMSEC Mission.

See also
Dynamic secrets
Electronics technician (United States Navy)
Information security
Information warfare
List of telecommunications encryption terms
NSA encryption systems
NSA product types
Operations security
Secure communication
Signals intelligence
Traffic analysis

References
External links
 This article incorporates public domain material from Federal Standard 1037C. General Services Administration. Archived from the original on 2022-01-22. (in support of MIL-STD-188).
National Information Systems Security Glossary
 This article incorporates public domain material from Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms. United States Department of Defense.
"INFORMATION SECURITY GUIDELINES FOR THE DEPLOYMENT OF DEPLOYABLE SWITCHED SYSTEMS" (PDF). Joint Staff. February 1, 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 16, 2012.
"Communications Security (COMSEC) awareness training". U.S. ARMY SIGNAL CENTER AND FORT GORDON. April 17, 2000. Archived from the original on March 30, 2009.
https://web.archive.org/web/20121002192433/http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/pdf/466002p.pdf
"Army Key Management Systems (AKMS)". Project Manager NETOPS Current Force. Archived from the original on September 30, 2010.
Cryptography machines