A number of tools exist to generate computer network diagrams. Broadly, there are four types of tools that help create network maps and diagrams:

Hybrid tools
Network Mapping tools
Network Monitoring tools
Drawing toolsNetwork mapping and drawing software support IT systems managers to understand the hardware and software services on a network and how they are interconnected. Network maps and diagrams are a component of network documentation. They are required artifacts to better manage IT systems' uptime, performance, security risks, plan network changes and upgrades.

Hybrid tools
These tools have capabilities in common with drawing tools and network monitoring tools. They are more specialized than general drawing tools and provide network engineers and IT systems administrators a higher level of automation and the ability to develop more detailed network topologies and diagrams. Typical capabilities include but not limited to:

Displaying port / interface information on connections between devices on the maps
Visualizing VLANs / subnets
Visualizing virtual servers and storage
Visualizing flow of network traffic across devices and networks
Displaying WAN and LAN maps by location
Importing network configuration files to generate topologies automatically

Network mapping tools
These tools are specifically designed to generate automated network topology maps. These visual maps are automatically generated by  scanning the network using network discovery protocols. Some of these tools integrate into documentation and monitoring tools. Typical capabilities include but not limited to:

Automatically scanning the network using SNMP, SSH, WMI, etc.
Scanning Windows and Unix servers
Scanning virtual hosts
Scanning routing protocols
Performing scheduled scans
Tracking changes to the network
Notifying users of changes to the network

Network monitoring tools
Some network monitoring tools generate visual maps by automatically scanning the network using network discovery protocols. The maps are ideally suited for viewing network monitoring status and issues visually. Typical capabilities include but not limited to:

Automatically scanning the network using SNMP, WMI, etc.
Scanning Windows and Unix servers
Scanning virtual hosts
Scanning routing protocols
Scanning connection speeds
Performing scheduled scans
Tracking changes to the network

Drawing tools
These tools help users to create network topology diagrams by adding icons to a canvas and using lines and connectors to draw linkages between nodes. This category of tools is similar to general drawing and paint tools. Typical capabilities include but not limited to:

Libraries of icons for devices
Ability to add shapes and annotations to maps
Ability to create free-form diagrams

List of network monitoring tools that generate network maps
Some notable tools (may not be an exhaustive list):

List of drawing tools
Some notable tools (may not be an exhaustive list):

See also
Computer network diagram

External links
"Cisco Brand Center / Network Topology Icons". www.cisco.com. Retrieved 2018-04-09.
"Cisco Unified Communications System for IP Telephony: Microsoft Visio network topology diagrams (resp. diagram templates)". www.cisco.com. Retrieved 2018-04-09.