Computer Aid International is a not-for-profit organisation active in the field of Information and Communication Technologies for Development. A registered charity, Computer Aid was founded in 1997 to bridge the digital divide by providing refurbished PCs from the UK to educational and non-profit organisations in developing countries.
Computer Aid has provided over 267,000 refurbished computers to educational institutions and not-for-profit organisations in more than 110 countries.

Organization
Computer Aid International is a non-governmental organisation registered with the Charity Commission of England & Wales and is a not-for-profit social business.
Computer Aid has offices in London, South Africa and Kenya. At the Africa HQ in Nairobi, 
Computer Aid has a board of trustees that meet quarterly to provide strategic direction and fiduciary oversight.
Denis Goldberg was Computer Aid's Honorary Patron.

Strategy
Computer Aid offers a decommissioning service to UK companies, government departments and universities that are upgrading their computer systems – donated PCs are data-wiped, refurbished and tested. Non profit organisations in the developing world can apply for refurbished computers for educational projects. They also run their own projects, such as Digital Schools where computer labs are set up.

UK IT Donors
Computer Aid has partnered with Tier 1 to offer a secure service to UK companies and organisations replacing their hardware. The charity provides end-of-life IT asset management services, which include data removal, computer refurbishment, reuse, and recycling.

See also
Computer technology for developing areas
Geekcorps
Geeks Without Bounds
NetCorps
Random Hacks of Kindness
United Nations Information Technology Service (UNITeS)

References
Further reading
Report on Low-Power PC Research Project (PDF). Computer Aid International. 2009. p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-09-11.
Why Reuse is Better Than Recycling (PDF). Computer Aid International. 2010. p. 4.
WEEE Directive Ver. 2.0 – What Europe Must Do (PDF). Computer Aid International. 2010. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-03-21. Retrieved 2010-09-16.

External links
Article on a Computer Aid project supporting blind and visually impaired children in Kenya
Article on a Computer Aid project helping farmers to maximise crop harvests in times of drought
"Computer Aid International, registered charity no. 1069256". Charity Commission for England and Wales.