Computer science and engineering (CSE) is an academic program at many universities which comprises approaches of computer science and computer engineering. There is no clear division in computing between science and engineering, just like in the field of materials science and engineering. However, some classes are historically more related to computer science (e.g. data structures and algorithms), and other to computer engineering (eg. computer architecture). CSE is also a term often used in Europe to translate the name of technical or engineering informatics academic programs. It is offered in both undergraduate as well postgraduate with specializations.

Academic courses
Academic programs vary between colleges, but typically include a combination of topics in computer science, computer engineering, and electrical engineering. Undergraduate courses usually include programming, algorithms and data structures, computer architecture, operating systems, computer networks, parallel computing, embedded systems, algorithms design, circuit analysis and electronics, digital logic and processor design, computer graphics, scientific computing, software engineering, database systems, digital signal processing, virtualization, computer simulations and games programming. CSE programs also include core subjects of theoretical computer science such as theory of computation, numerical methods, machine learning, programming theory and paradigms. Modern academic programs also cover emerging computing fields like image processing, data science, robotics, bio-inspired computing, computational biology, autonomic computing and artificial intelligence. Most CSE programs require introductory mathematical knowledge, hence the first year of study is dominated by mathematical courses, primarily discrete mathematics, mathematical analysis, linear algebra, probability, and statistics, as well as the introduction to physics and electrical and electronic engineering. Students usually also have the opportunity to choose one social science subject.

Example universities with CSE majors and departments
APJ Abdul Kalam Technological University 
American International University-Bangladesh
Daffodil International University
American University of Beirut
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology
BRAC University
Brainware University
Bucknell University
Delft University of Technology
Green University of Bangladesh
International Islamic University Chittagong
Indian Institute of Technology Varanasi
International Institute of Information Technology
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
Indian Institute of Technology Madras
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
Korea University
Lund University
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
North South University
The Ohio State University
Santa Clara University
Seoul National University
UC Davis
UC Irvine
UCLA
UC Merced
UC San Diego
UC Santa Cruz
Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman
University of Iowa
University of Michigan
University of New South Wales
University of Nevada
University of Notre Dame
University of Ulm
University of Washington
Vellore Institute of Technology
Shahid Beheshti University
Shiraz University
Yonsei University

See also
Computer science
Computer engineering
Computer graphics (computer science)
Bachelor of Technology


== References ==