A companion robot is a robot created to create real or apparent companionship for human beings. Target markets for companion robots include the elderly and single children.

Examples
There are several companion robot prototypes, and these include Paro, CompanionAble, and EmotiRob, among others.

Paro
Paro is a pet-type robot system developed by Japan's National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST). The robot, which looked like a small seal, was designed for the care and support of old individuals, especially those living independently. Experiments showed that Paro facilitated elderly residents to communicate with each other, which led to psychological improvements.

CompanionAble
This robot is classified as an FP 7 EU project. It is built to "cooperate with Ambient Assistive Living environment". The autonomous device, which is also built to support the elderly, helps its owner interact with smart home environment as well as caregivers. It is capable of speech and movement and can detect and track people at home.

EmotiRob
EmotiRob is a robot in development by a French team to engage fragile children emotionally. It has cognitive capabilities, which are further extended so that the robot can have a natural linguistic interaction with its owner through the DRAGON speech-recognition software developed by a company called NUANCE. Such interaction is expected to facilitate a child's cognitive development and develop new learning patterns.

LOVOT
Lovot is a Japanese company robot whose only purpose is "to make you happy". It features over 50 sensors that mimic the behavior of a human baby or small pet, a 360° camera with a microphone, the ability to distinguish humans from objects, neoteny eyes, and an internal warmth of 30° celsius. An interactive Lovot Café was opened in Japan October 3rd, 2020.

NICOBO
Nicobo was developed by Panasonic and was influenced by the loneliness of  lockdowns created as a measure of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was designed to appear vulnerable, which creates empathy in its owners. Nicobo's name derives from the Japanese word for "smile".

See also
Virtual Pet
List of robotic dogs
Furby


== References ==