The Cornell Club of New York, usually referred to as The Cornell Club, is a private club in Midtown Manhattan, New York City. Its membership is restricted to alumni and faculty of Cornell University, family of Cornellians, business associates of Members, and graduates of The Club's affiliate schools.
The Cornell Club's clubhouse is a fourteen-story building located at 6 East 44th Street between Madison Avenue and Fifth Avenue.

History
Founded in 1865, Cornell is an Ivy League university located in Ithaca, New York. In 1889, the first Cornell Club was formed by Cornell University graduates.  The current 14-story clubhouse located in midtown Manhattan at 6 East 44th Street was formerly the offices of the Chicago Pneumatic Tool Company. The building was a gift to the university and was renovated by San Francisco-based Gensler & Associates.  The clubhouse opened its doors on December 1, 1989.Past locations:

1900: The Royalton Apartment Hotel on West 44th Street
1901: 65 Park Avenue and Madison Avenue at 38th Street
1939: The Hotel Barclay (now the Inter-Continental) at 48th Street
1962: 50th Street at Third Avenue
1982: The Women's National Headquarters and NYU's townhall facilityAfter the Penn Club of New York (est. 1901) became the first alumni clubhouse to join Clubhouse Row for inter-club events at 30 West 44th Street after Harvard Club of New York City (est. 1888) at 27 West 44th, then New York Yacht Club (est. 1899) at 37 West 44th, and Yale Club of New York City (est. 1915) on East 44th (and Vanderbilt) and Cornell Club of New York (est. 1989) at 6 East 44th on the same block, with Princeton Club of New York joining in 1963 at 15 West 43rd (the only alumni clubhouse who wasn't on 44th Street, whose members, part of the staff, and in-residence club, Williams College Club of New York, were absorbed into Penn Club following a previous visiting reciprocity agreement between the Princeton-Penn Clubs, before Princeton's went out of business during COVID). Despite being in New York City, Columbia University Club of New York (est. 1901) left Princeton after residence agreement issues to become in-residence at The Penn Club, while Dartmouth shares the Yale Club, and Brown shares the Cornell Club.

Membership and benefits
Membership in the Cornell Club is restricted to alumni, faculty, and students of Cornell University along with alumni of a short list of ten affiliated schools: Brown, Colgate, Duke, Georgetown, Notre Dame, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Stanford, Trinity College Dublin, Tulane, and Wake Forest. Most members are alumni of Cornell University.
All members enjoy full use of the clubhouse facilities and its services, except for the Health & Fitness Center, for which the Club charges additional fees. The Club includes a bar, The Big Red Tap & Grill, and a restaurant, The Cayuga Room. In addition, the club has four banquet/meeting rooms, a business center, 48 overnight guest rooms, and a library. Members may use the squash courts at the Yale Club of New York City.
Dues are on a sliding scale, based on age and proximity to the club. Like most private clubs, members of the club are given reciprocal benefits at clubs around the United States and the world.

See also
Columbia University Club of New York
Harvard Club of Boston
Harvard Club of New York City
Penn Club of New York City
Princeton Club of New York
The Yale Club of New York City
List of American gentlemen's clubs

Footnotes
External links

Official website