An electronic visual display, informally a screen, is a display device for presentation of images, text, or video transmitted electronically, without producing a permanent record.  Electronic visual displays include television sets, computer monitors, and digital signage. By the above definition, an overhead projector (along with screen onto which the text, images, or video is projected) could reasonably be considered an electronic visual display since it is a display device for the presentation of an images, plain text, or video transmitted electronically without producing a permanent record. They are also ubiquitous in mobile computing applications like tablet computers, smartphones, and information appliances.
From the mid-2000s through to the early 2020s, flat-panel displays dominated the industry, as cathode-ray tubes (CRT) were phased out, especially for computer applications, and curved panels were not yet developed.

Types
These are the technologies used to create the various displays in use today.

Electroluminescent (EL) display
Liquid crystal display (LCD) with Light-emitting diode (LED)-backlit Liquid crystal display (LCD)
Light-emitting diode (LED) display
OLED display
AMOLED display
Plasma (P) display
Quantum dot (QD) displayAdditionally, CRTs were widely used in the past and microLED displays are under development.

Classification
Electronic visual displays present visual information according to the electrical input signal (analog or digital) either by emitting light (then they are called active displays) or, alternatively, by modulating available light during the process of reflection or transmission (light modulators are called passive displays).

Display mode of observation
Electronic visual displays can be observed directly (direct view display) or the displayed information can be projected to a screen (transmissive or reflective screen). This usually happens with smaller displays at a certain magnification.

A different kind of projection display is the class of "laser projection displays", where the image is built up sequentially either via line by line scanning or by writing one complete column at a time. For that purpose one beam is formed from three lasers operating at the primary colors, and this beam is scanned electro-mechanically (galvanometer scanner, micro-mirror array)) or electro-acousto-optically.

Layout of picture elements
Depending on the shape and on the arrangement of the picture elements of a display, either fixed information can be displayed (symbols, signs), simple numerals (7-segment layout) or arbitrary shapes can be formed (dot-matrix displays).

Emission and control of colors
Colors can be generated by selective emission, by selective absorption, transmission or by selective reflection.

Addressing modes
Each sub-pixel of a display device must be selected (addressed) in order to be energized in a controlled way.

Display driving modes
See also
Display device
ISO 13406-2

References
SID - Society for Information Display International Conference Proceedings 1970–2008
Journal of the Society for Information Display (JSID)
Display Reparatur (in German)
Passive Displays
Choosing an IT device

Further reading
Pochi Yeh, Claire Gu: "Optics of Liquid Crystal Displays", John Wiley & Sons 1999, 4.5. Conoscopy, pp. 139