The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI, pronounced "gee-pay") is an international initiative established to guide the responsible development and use of artificial intelligence (AI) in a manner that respects human rights and the shared democratic values of its members. The partnership was first proposed by Canada and France at the 2018 44th G7 summit, and officially launched in June 2020. GPAI is hosted by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
GPAI seeks to bridge the gap between theory and practice by supporting research and applied activities in areas that are directly relevant to policymakers in the realm of AI. It brings together experts from industry, civil society, governments, and academia to collaborate on the challenges and opportunities presented by artificial intelligence.

History
The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence was announced on the margins of the 2018 G7 Summit by Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and French President Emmanuel Macron. It officially launched on June 15, 2020 with fifteen founding members: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Slovenia, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the European Union.The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) hosts a dedicated secretariat to support GPAI's governing bodies and activities. UNESCO joined the partnership in December 2020 as an observer. On November 11, 2021, Czechia, Israel and few more EU countries also joined the GPAI, bringing the total membership to 25 countries. Since the November 2022 summit, the list of members stands at 29.Austria, Chile, Finland, Malaysia, Norway, Slovakia and Switzerland were invited. The seven, however, are pending membership approval.

Membership
The following 29 members of the GPAI are:
 Argentina
 Australia
 Belgium
 Brazil
 Canada
 Czech Republic
 Denmark
 France
 Germany
 India
 Ireland
 Israel
 Italy
 Japan
 Mexico
 Netherlands
 New Zealand
 Poland
 Republic of Korea
 Senegal
 Serbia
 Singapore
 Slovenia
 Spain
 Sweden
 Turkey
 United Kingdom
 United States
 European UnionInvited members:

 Austria (pending membership approval)
 Chile (pending membership approval)
 Finland (pending membership approval)
 Malaysia (pending membership approval)
 Norway (pending membership approval)
 Slovakia (pending membership approval)
 Switzerland (pending membership approval)

Organization
GPAI's experts collaborate across several Working Groups themes: Responsible AI (including an ad-hoc subgroup on AI and Pandemic Response), Data Governance, Future of Work, and Innovation & Commercialization. GPAI's Working Groups are supported by two Centres of Expertise: one in Montreal that supports the first two Working Groups, and one in Paris that supports the latter two. It also has a Steering Committee, the elected chair of which has also been to date elected chair of the Multi Stakeholder Group (MEG). These chairs have been:

Jordan Zed and Baroness Joanna Shields (Shields, MEG chair; 2020-2021),
Joanna Shields and Renaud Vedel (Shields, MEG chair; 2021-2022),
Yoichi Iida and Inma Martinez (Martinez, MEG chair; 2023-2024)GPAI has a rotating presidency and host (much like the G7). The presidencies to date have been:

 Canada (2020)
 France (2021)
 Japan  (2022)
 India (2023)

References
External links
Official website