This is a list of terms and symbols used in scientific names for organisms, and in describing the names.  For proper parts of the names themselves, see List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names. Note that many of the abbreviations are used with or without a stop.

Naming standards and taxonomic organizations and their codes and taxonomies
ICTV – International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses
ICSP – International Committee on Systematics of Prokaryotes
formerly the ICSB – International Committee on Systematic Bacteriology
publishes the ICNP – International Code of Nomenclature of Prokaryotes
formerly the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria (ICNB) or Bacteriological Code (BC)
ICZN – International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature
publishes ICZN the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature or "ICZN Code"
IBC – International Botanical Congress
publishes ICN the International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants
formerly ICBN or the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (current version the Shenzhen Code)
also publishes ICNCP or the International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants
IAPT – International Association for Plant Taxonomy
publishes Taxon
also publishes Regnum Vegetabile which contains the IBC's ICN, the Index Nominum Genericorum, and the Index Herbariorum

General terms
clade, cladistics
phylum, phylogeny
taxon, taxonomy; Taxon is a journal of the IAPT, where proposals are made
synonym: a name for a taxon different from the currently accepted name
pro parte (abbreviation p. p.; "for part" in Latin)
senior synonym, (zoology): the earliest (correctly published) name
junior synonym, (zoology): any later name
homotypic synonym (botany)
heterotypic synonym (botany): (or taxonomic synonym)  a synonym that comes into being when a taxon is reduced in status ("reduced to synonymy") and becomes part of a different taxon; the zoological equivalent is "subjective synonym"
objective synonym (zoology)
subjective synonym (zoology): see taxonomic synonym
taxonomic synonym (botany): see taxonomic synonym
basionym or basyonym (botany), or protonym or original combination (zoology): original name on which the current name is based; in bacteriology "basonym"
combinatio nova (comb. nov.): new combination; when a taxon has been given a new name, preserving one of the previous components
status novus (abbr. stat. nov.): new status; when a taxon has been given a new rank
homonym: names spelled identically, but, in some codes, names spelled similarly, as defined by the code
senior homonym (zoology): the first legitimate use of the name which generally takes priority
junior homonym (zoology), later homonym (botany): a later and generally illegitimate use, though in some circumstances the later name is allowed to stand
hemihomonym: a homonym across naming authorities that is permitted because any confusion is improbable
parahomonym: names that are similar enough to be likely to be confused
isonym (botany) an identical name based on the same type, but published later
Principle of the First Reviser
Principle of Priority
Principle of Typification
taxonomic authority
binomial authority
binomial nomenclature (also "binominal")
trinomial nomenclature (also "trinominal")
hybrid name (botany): either two parent binomials, separated by a "×" (q.v.) or a given binomial, with or without an intercalated "×"
chresonym published usage of a name.
orthochresonym
heterochresonym
taxon (plural "taxa")
wastebasket taxon (also "wastebin taxon", "dustbin taxon" or "catch-all taxon")
form taxon
Lazarus taxon
Elvis taxon
sister taxon
zombie taxon
node-based taxon
parataxon
ichnotaxon (ichnogenus (igen.), ichnospecies (isp.), etc.): a taxon (genus, species, etc.) only known by its work, e.g. footprints, nests, or bite marks
ootaxon (oospecies, etc.): a taxon known from fossil eggs
sciotaxon a taxon known from partial evidence but believed to be identical to an orthotaxon
polyphyletic taxon
monophyletic taxon: a taxon consisting of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants; a clade
paraphyletic taxon
species complex: a group of closely related species very similar in appearance, generally constituting a monophyletic taxon
species aggregate or aggregate species: a grouping of closely related species that are treated like a single species for practical purposes
alliance: a group of species or genera that have at some time been considered provisionally related
conspecific: of the same species; e. g. of two taxa previously thought to be different species
congeners: items of the same genus
circumscription: the limits of a taxon as made evident by its recognized constituency; a taxon may accordingly be circumscribed differently by different authorities if they recognize different constituents
sensu ("sense" in Latin): as in  sensu stricto (s. s.) (in the strict sense), sensu lato (in a broad sense), etc.; see sensu for more variants and details
secundum ("following" in Latin): e. g. "secundum Smith"
form classification

Types
Type
Type genus
Type series
Type species
Type specimen
Allotype: a designated type of opposite sex to the holotype
Clonotype
Epitype: an additional or clarifying type
Ergatotype
Hapantotype
Holotype
Isotype: a type identical to the holotype
Isolectotype:
Lectotype a type specimen selected from a group of syntypes
Name-bearing type
Neotype: a replacement for the holotype
Paralectotype: a remaining syntype once the lectotype and any isolectotypes are excluded (bot.)
Paratype: a member of a type series apart from the holotype or isotype (zoology); a syntype that is not a member of the type series (botany)
Syntype: a specimen cited in the original description of the taxon (botany)
Type locality or location: where the type specimen was found
Type host: in parasitology, the host species from which the type specimen was recovered

Rank names
The main ranks are kingdom (regnum), phylum or division (divisio), class (classis), order (ordo), family (familia), genus and species.  The ranks of section and series are also used in botany for groups within genera, while section is used in zoology for a division of an order. Further levels in the hierarchy can be made by the addition of prefixes such as sub-, super-, infra-, and so on.
Divisions such as "morph", "form", "variety", "strain", "breed", "cultivar", hybrid (nothospecies) and "landrace" are used to describe various sub-specific groups in different fields.
It is possible for a clade to be unranked, for example Psoroptidia (Yunker, 1955) and the SAR supergroup.  Sometimes a rank is described as clade where the traditional hierarchy cannot accommodate them.

Latin descriptions of names or taxa
Note that in zoology the English descriptions, such as "conserved name", for example, are acceptable and generally used.  These descriptions can be classified between accepted names (nom. cons., nom. nov., nom. prot.) and unaccepted combinations for different reasons (nom. err., nom. illeg., nom. nud., nom. rej., nom. supp., nom. van.), with some cases in between regarding the use (nom. dub.: used but not fully accepted; nom. obl.: accepted but not fully used, so it yields precedence to a nom. prot).

Candidatus (Ca.) - a taxon proposed from incomplete information, such as uncultured bacteria known from metagenomics
ex errore – made in error
incertae sedis – of uncertain placement
nomen alternativum (nom. alt.; plural: nomina alternativa) – an alternative name, as for certain plant families
nomen conservandum (nom. cons.; plural: nomina conservanda) – a conserved name
nomen dubium (nom. dub.; plural: nomina dubia) (zoo. bact. bot.(informal)) – a name of questionable applicationnomen ambiguum (plural: nomina ambigua), (bot.) a name that has been used with more than one meaning
nomen confusum (plural: nomina confusa), (bact.) a name based on a mixed bacterial culture
nomen perplexum (plural: nomina perplexa), a name confusingly similar to another name or names
nomen periculosum (plural: nomina periculosa), an name which can lead to dangerous outcomes, through confusion
nomen erratum (nom. err.; plural: nomina errata) - a name given in error
nomen illegitimum (nom. illeg.; plural: nomina illegitima) – an illegitimate name
nomen invalidum (nom. inval.; plural: nomina invalida) – an invalid name
nomen manuscriptum -  a name that appears in a manuscript
nomen monstrositatum (nom. monstr.) – a name based on a monstrosity (fasciation, phyllody or similar deformities)
nomen novum (nom. nov.; plural: nomina nova) – a replacement name
nomen nudum (nom. nud.; plural: nomina nuda) – a name published without an accompanying description
nomen oblitum (nom. obl.; plural: nomina oblita) – a name which has been overlooked (literally, forgotten) and is no longer valid
nomen protectum (nom. prot.; plural: nomina protecta) – a name granted protection
nomen rejiciendum (nom. rej.; plural: nomina rejicienda) – a name that has been rejected and cannot be used
nomen suppressum (nom. supp.; plural: nomina suppressa) – a name that has been suppressed and cannot be used
nomen vanum (plural: nomina vana) - not a useful term, has been used to mean either a nomen dubium (see above in this list), or an invalid change in spelling, better called an unjustified emendation
species inquirenda, a species of doubtful identity requiring further investigation

Latin abbreviations
cf.: confer; literally "compare", indicates approximate placement
f.: forma; form
nothovar.: nothovarietas; hybrid variety
nob.: nobis): by us, indicates the writers are the authority of a scientific name
p. p.: pro parte; "for part"
pro syn.: pro synonymo; "as synonym"
sensu auct.: sensu auctorum; in the sense of certain authors (generally referring to an invalid usage)
s.l.: sensu lato; in the broad (loose) sense
sp. (plural spp.): species (identical in English)
 sp. nov. (plural spp. nov.): species nova (species novae): new species (singular)
s.s.: sensu stricto; in the strict (narrow or precise) sense
ssp. (plural sspp. or subspp): subspecies (identical in English)
subf.: subforma; subform
subsp. (plural subspp.): subspecies (identical in English)
subvar.: subvarietas; subvariety
var.: varietas; variety

English abbreviations
bot. - botany
zoo. - zoology

Symbols
× : cross; indicates a hybrid
† : extinct
+ : graft or chimera; indicates a graft chimera

See also
Alpha taxonomy
Cladistics
Glossary of botanical terms
Species description


== References ==