The glossary of Arabic toponyms gives translations of Arabic terms commonly found as components in Arabic toponyms. A significant number of them were put together during the PEF Survey of Palestine carried out in the second half of the 19th century.

A
'Ain, pl.: `Ayūn, ʿUyūn
Spring, fountain, source. Examples: El Aaiún 
All pages with titles containing Ain
All pages with titles containing Aiun
Ab, Abu
Father; as a geographical term it signifies "producing", "containing", etc.;All pages with titles containing Ab
All pages with titles containing Abu
Arak, pl.: Arkan
Cavern or cliff (among various meanings); see All pages with titles containing Arak

B
Bab, pl.: Buwab
Gate. Examples Bab el-Mandeb; see All pages with titles containing Bab
Bahr
 Arabic: بحر - Sea, large river.  see All pages with titles containing Bahr
Beit
House.  see All pages with titles containing Beit
Balad
Arabic: بلد (sometimes transliterated as Beled or Belled) - Town;  see All pages with titles containing Balad
Bir
Arabic: بير, Well;  see All pages with titles containing Bir
Birkeh
 Artificial pool, tank;  see All pages with titles containing Birkeh
Buhayra, Baheirah
Arabic: بحيرة, Lake, lagoon; Diminutive of بَحْر (baḥr, “sea”).  
Burj
Arabic: برج, Tower, castle;  see All pages with titles containing Burj

D
Deir
wikt:دير monastery, convent, cloister (often ruins thereof); see All pages with titles containing Deir 
Derb
wikt:درب road, pass; see All pages with titles containing Derb 
Dhahr
wikt: ridge; see All pages with titles containing Dhahr

H
Haram
Sacred place; see All pages with titles containing Haram 
Haud
Reservoir, pond; see All pages with titles containing Haud

I
Ibn
Son; as a geographical term it signifies "producing", "containing", etc.; see All pages with titles containing Ibn

J
Jama'a,  Djama'a, Jami'a
place of gathering, community, mosque;All pages with titles containing Jama'a
All pages with titles containing Jami'a
Jazira, Jezireh, Jeziret
Island;All pages with titles containing Jazira
All pages with titles containing Jezireh
All pages with titles containing Jeziret
Jebel,  Djebel, Jebal, Jabal
mountain;All pages with titles containing Jabal
All pages with titles containing Jebal
All pages with titles containing Jebel
All pages with titles containing Djebel
Jisr
bridge;All pages with titles containing Jisr
Jubb
(Arabic: جُبّ ): well, pit;All pages with titles containing Jubb

K
Khirbet, Khurbet, Khirbat, etc.
is the conjunctive form "ruin of" (خربة)  of the Arabic word for "ruin" (خرب, khirba, kharab ("ruined"))
All pages with titles containing Khirbet
All pages with titles containing Khirbat
All pages with titles containing Khurbet
All pages with titles containing Kharab

Kul'ah, Kal'at, Kalat, Kala, Kaleh
Arabic, Persian. See "Qalat"
All pages with titles containing Kalat

M
Mazar
مزار: shrine, grave, tomb, etc.  cf. "Mazar (mausoleum)". The placename usually refers to a grave of a saint, ruler, etc.. Examples: Mazar-i-Sharif
All pages with titles containing Mazar
All pages with titles containing Al-Mazar
All pages with titles containing Almazar
Mazra', Mazra'a, Al-Mazra'a, Mazraa
 مزرعة, mazraʿa: farm, مزرع, mazraʿ: field, farmland, origin for majra, hamlet in Indian subcontinent

N
Nahr
wikt:نهر, river, e.g., Nahr-e Mian; see All pages with titles containing Nahr-e

O
Oued 
 In North African Arabic, same as Wadi 
All pages with titles containing Oued

Q
Qabr, Kabr, pl.:Qubūr
Arabic: قَبْر, pl. Arabic: قُبُور - tomb, graveAll pages with titles containing Qabr
All pages with titles containing Qubur
Qal'at, Qalat, Qala, Qalaat, Qal'a 
Arabic, Persian. Fortified place, fort, fortress, castle; see All pages with titles containing Qalat

R
Ras
wikt:رأس, head, cape, top, peak, etc.,All pages with titles containing Ras
Rujm, plural: rujum
wikt:رجم, mound, cairn, hill, spur, and also as "stone heap" or "tumulus".All pages with titles containing Rujm
All pages with titles containing Rujum

U
Umm
Mother; as a geographical term it signifies "producing", "containing", etc.; cf. "Mother of all";All pages with titles containing Umm

W
Wadi, Wad, North African Arabic: Oued
Watercourse: stream (often intermittent stream), sometimes dry waterbed, valley All pages with titles containing Wadi
All pages with titles containing Wady
All pages with titles containing Wad
All pages with titles containing Oued

See also
Oikonyms in Western and South Asia
Place names of Palestine

References
Sources
External links
The intro to a 1950s gazeteer for 35,000 placenames of Arabian Peninsula and surrounding waters and islands  contains a glossary of generic toponymic features