Hampton is a suburban area on the north bank of the River Thames, in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames, England, in the historic County of Middlesex.
Hampton is bounded by Bushy Park to the east (and to the north of St Albans Riverside  facing Tagg's Island), the suburbs of Hampton Hill and Fulwell to the north, green belt to the west, and the Thames to the south. Historically, the area known as Hampton included Hampton Court Palace, Hampton Hill and Hampton Wick (which are now known collectively as "The Hamptons").
Hampton is the site of the Hampton Water Treatment Works (see below), which supplies ~30% of London's fresh water. Hampton is primarily residential, served by Hampton Station on the Shepperton Branch Line to London Waterloo.

History
Pre-history
The River Thames was displaced southwards to its present course through Berkshire and London following the Anglian glaciation c. 450,000 BCE. The local geology comprises Kempton Park Gravel above London Clay, on which the Thames deposits fertile, well-drained alluvial soils, making it an attractive area for human habitation and settlement.There is evidence of small hunter-gatherer communities within the Thames Valley dating to the Palaeolithic period, who would have hunted migrating animal herds (reindeer and horse) depending on seasonal conditions. Hand-axes and a flint from that era have been recovered from sites in Hampton, indicating the presence of human activity as early as the Wolstonian Stage.The resettlement of Britain following the Last Glacial Maximum and start of the Holocene is evidenced in Hampton and surrounding areas by the artefacts (predominantly flintwork) of Mesolithic hunter-gatherers, who would have favoured the diversity of habitats and food resources offered by rivers and their floodplains for settlement and resource procurement. Three Mesolitihic tranchet axes were discovered during construction of the Hampton Waterworks.Evidence of Neolithic and Bronze Age settlement activity in the area is widespread, during a period when the level of the River Thames would have been significantly lower than at present. Finds on Garrick's Ait (Neolithic stone axe), Hurst Park (Neolithic pits), Platt's Eyot (early Bronze Age axe), and the excavation in 1854 of a significant Bronze Age barrow in Bushy Park (containing the cremated remains and offerings of a local chieftan) indicate the transition to settled agriculture.Before the Roman invasion of Britain, the Hampton area was ruled by the Catuvellauni, a Celtic tribe with its centre of government at Watamestede, near modern-day St Albans. There is little archaelogical evidence of Roman activity in the Hampton area (which was concentrated around the river crossing at Kingston-upon-Thames), except for a small collection of finds at Hampton Hill, and field boundaries laid out to Roman proportions in what would become Bushy Park. Following the end of Roman rule the Hampton area would have been on the fringes of the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of Mercia, in territory later known as Middel Seaxe.

Anglo-Saxon and Medieval Hampton
The historic settlement of Hampton is thought to have developed during the Saxon period, centred on a village clustered around the intersection of the roads which became modern-day Thames Street, Church Street and High Street, and the hillock on which St Mary’s Church stands. The Anglo-Saxon parish of Hampton included present-day Hampton, Hampton Hill, Hampton Wick and hamlet of Hampton Court. The name Hampton may come from the Anglo-Saxon words hamm meaning an enclosure in the bend of a river and ton meaning farmstead or settlement.The 1086 Domesday Book records that prior to the Norman Conquest the Manor of Hampton belonged to Aelfgar, Earl of Mercia. Under the manorial system, tenant serfs worked the arable farm and grazing land of the manor on behalf of the (absentee) lord. Bushy Park shows extensive use of the ridge and farrow system of agriculture, introduced by the Saxons.The place name Hamntone is recorded in the 1086 Domesday Book. The entry for Hamntone enumerates: 41 villagers and 4 smallholders (accounting for households comprising ~200 individuals); 25 ploughlands and 18 lord's lands (belonging to the lord of the manor), each comprising the area that could be ploughed by eight oxen in a year (~120 acres); 20 plough teams (of 8 oxen each), a meadow, and a fishery. The total annual value of the estate in 1086 (used to calculate how much tax the lord should be charged) was 39 pounds.
After the Conquest the Manor was granted to Walter of Saint-Valéry, whose family owned until it 1217, when Thomas de St Valerie was exiled (having joined the rebel barons against King John), and the manor sold to Henry de St Albans, a London merchant.
The manor was acquired in 1237 by the Order of Knights of the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem (known as the Knights Hospitaller), who already owned a house and sheep pasture on the site of present-day Hampton Court Palace. A Benedictine order charged with the care and defence of the Holy Land (and the precursor to the modern Order of St John), the Knights Hospitaller operated from headquarters on the island of Rhodes, using their holdings in England to fund their operations. In 1338, the Order commissioned a financial survey of its possessions in England, which showed the Manor of Hampton comprising 800 acres of demesne (rented arable land), 40 acres of meadow by the Thames, pasture for 24 oxen, 18 cows, 10 store cattle and 2000 sheep, a fish weir and a pigeon house.

Post-medieval Hampton
The Knights Hospitallers' house at Hampton Court was regularly used by the royal court as alternative accommodation for Sheene Palace, the royal palace on the Thames at Richmond. (In 1353 Edward III had paid for the Order's house to be rebuilt after his servants accidentally set fire to it.) The destruction by fire of Sheene Palace in 1497 saw the royal court decamp to Hampton Court: in 1500 the Lord Chamberlain Sir Giles Daubeney ordered that 300 acres of the demesne near Hampton be enclosed for hunting, taking out a lease for the entire manor in 1505. After his death in 1508, the lease passed to Sir Giles' wife, who allowed it to lapse. Cardinal Wolsey purchased the lease from the Order in 1514, and continued development of the site into the historic palace ultimately acquired by Henry VIII after Wolsey's demise in 1529.
The 1534 Act of Supremacy enshrining Henry VIII as supreme head of the Church of England saw the expropriation of Catholic properties throughout England. The Knights Hospitallers Order was formerly dissolved by an Act of Parliament in 1540 and the manor annexed by the Crown. In 1536 Henry acquired part of Teddington from the Abbot of Westminster, enclosing the land for hunting. In 1537 Henry emparked the arable land around Upper Lodge and ordered the construction of brick walls from Hampton Court to Teddington and Hampton Wick. The boundaries of modern-day Bushy Park were set in 1620 with the addition of the Hampton Eastfield (nearest the town). Provisioning water for the ever-increasing population of the royal complex at Hampton Court had been problematic since the time Wolsely had first taken the Hospitallers' lease,^  but it wasn't until Charles I ordered the construction of a canal connecting the River Colne to the Thames via Hampton Court that the palace secured a steady supply for its household and expanding water features. Designed by Nicholas Lane, the canal started at Longford on the Colne, and was built swiftly in 1638-9, cutting through Feltham, Hanworth, then-Hounslow Heath,and the north-Hampton heath on its route to Bushy Park. Initially unpopular for blocking roads and dividing parishes, the original river (variously known as the Cardinal's, Queen's or King's River) was poorly made and prone to flooding. Protesters dammned the river in 1649 and the river fell into disuse and ran dry during the Protectorate. After the Restoration, Charles II sought to replicate in Bushy Park the garden at Versailles, establishing the Long Water in Home Park as a wedding present for Catherine of Breganza, and thus ordered the Longford River restored.Between 1500 and 1700 the population of Hampton and Hampton Wick grew from 300-350 to 1100-1200, despite outbreaks of Plague in 1603-6 and 1665-66. Indeed the population of Hampton and its surrounding area was bolstered by the migration of London citizens out of the city: Charles II moving his court to Hampton Court in July 1665 before decamping to the relative safety of Oxford the following September.

Hampton in the 19th Century
An Inclosure Act applicable to Hampton was passed in 1811, which led to the parcelling  and enclosure of common land, and a steady increase in population. St Mary's Church was demolished in 1829 and replaced by the present larger building in 1831, at which time the parish of Hampton Wick was separately established. The parish of Hampton Hill was established in 1863.
In 1838 the restoration of the Great Hall of Hampton Court Palace was completed, and Queen Victoria opened the palace to the public, which became a major tourist attraction. Visitor numbers increased further following the opening of the Hampton Court branch line (off the London and Southampton Railway mainline) in 1849.

The passage of the Metropolis Water Act in 1852 made it unlawful for any water company to extract water for domestic use from the tidal reaches of the Thames (i.e. below Teddington Lock). This led to the Southwark and Vauxhall, Grand Junction and West Middlesex Water Companies to jointly construct water works on the Thames at Hampton, between the Sunbury and Molesey Locks, which began operations in 1855 (see below).  The Shepperton branch line, including Hampton and Fulwell stations, was opened in 1864, and electrified in 1916. The curve of the railway line would come to define the suburb of Hampton distinct from the original village. The 'New Street' (now Station Road) was developed along the route of a historic trackway to link Hampton Station to the village.The rapid growth and urbanisation of London in the 19th Century saw agricultural production pushed out to its perimeter, and in Hampton land which had been used for grazing and farming was enclosed and converted to market gardens, to service the increased demand from markets in and around London. The nurseries would continue to expand production until after World War II.Between 1811 and 1851 the population of Hampton grew from 1,984 to 3,134, and by 1911 had reached 9,220.

Modern Hampton
Hampton fire station was built in 1897. A police station had operated in Hampton since 1846, but moved to a "a new and more commodious Police Station ... erected in Station Road near the World’s End public house" in 1905. London United Tramways extended its network from Twickenham to Hampton, Hampton Court, East Twickenham (just west of Richmond Bridge) and Teddington in 1903. Hampton Pool was built in 1922 (on land previously occupied by the Hampton and Hampton Hill Rifle Club) after plans approved in 1914 were delayed due to the outbreak of the World War I.
A telephone exchange was built in 1927 (a four storey building on High Street, Hampton), as a replacement for the original telephone exchange at Manor Road in Molesey (hence known as the Molesey Telephone Exchange). The exchange switched from manual operation to Subscriber Trunk Dialling in the 1960s, and enabled for ADSL broadband internet in 2000.The modern streetplan was laid out following old lanes and field boundaries. Suburban infill of the area north of Hampton Station delineated by the railway line took place mostly throughout the Interwar period.By the 1960s the Hampton nurseries began to face competition from overseas and domestic produce sourced using refrigeration, air freight and cheaper labour, and ultimately became uncompetitive and increasingly derelict. After a lengthy planning process, work to develop the area into the Nurserylands Housing estate began in 1980.The combined population of the Hamptons was 37,131 at the 2001 census.

Hampton and the River Thames
Hampton stands on the north bank of a bend in the River Thames, and has a close historical association with the river as a trading post and commercial/industrial centre. Boatyards and slipways have led down to the river from the village for centuries. Benn's boathouse on Thames Street was reputed to have been built before 1704 (being demolished in 1946-7 and merging with Constable's boatyard next door). As Henry Ripley wrote in 1883:

Islands
Modern Hampton comprises Platt's Eyot, Benn's Island and Tagg's Island, but historically also includes Garrick's Ait and Ash Island.

Platt's Eyot
Platt's Eyot is a large island opposite the Hampton Water Treatment Works. Historically willow was cultivated on the island, the osiers being strong, flexible and resistant to rot, and suitable for fish traps, basket-making and reinforcing riverbanks. The first boatyard on the island was constructed on the eastern end in 1866 by Thomas Tagg. In 1904 shipbuilder John Isaac Thornycroft established the Hampton Launch Works, generating cabin cruisers and pleasure craft. During wartime, production shifted: to torpedo-carrying motor launches in the First World War, and constructing motor torpedo boats, motor launches and landing craft during the Second World War.In 1910, the height of the island's western end was augmented by fill from the excavation of the Stain Hill Reservoirs. The island was connected to the north bank of the Thames by a pedestrian bridge in 1941. Boat building ceased in the 1960s and the boatsheds reverted to light industrial use, including being used as music studios. The boatyards were largely destroyed by fire in 2021.

Benn's Island
Benn's Island is a small uninhabited island close to the Hampton riverbank below St Mary's Church. In the 19th century the island was occupied by the Thames Valley Sailing Club (since relocated to Sunbury Lock Ait), and since 1945 has been leased by the Hampton Sailing Club.

Tagg's Island
Tagg's Island is an inhabited private island surrounded by 62 houseboats in a self-styled community of artists and creatives. Historically, the island has been the site of multiple hotel and resort developments, including the Island Hotel established by Thomas Tagg (after whom the island is named), the famous Karsino built by impresario Fred Karno, which, following Karno's bankruptcy, became known as the Thames Riveria under various owners. The island was bought by car manufacturer AC Cars in 1940, who converted the skating rink and tennis courts into factory space for wartime munitions, and later, Invacars for the Ministry of Pensions. The hotel was demolished in 1971. In 1980 houseboat owners Gerry and Gillian Braban bought the island, excavating a lagoon in the centre of the island (increasing the number of houseboats by 20) and rebuilding a road bridge to the north bank.

River crossings
Hampton Ferry has linked Hampton to the south bank of the Thames at Hurst Park, Molesey since at least 1514, and reputedly since the time of the Domesday book. A ferry had also operated linking Hampton Court to present-day East Molesey since the Tudor period, with a bridge first constructed on the site in 1753. The present-day Hampton Court Bridge, opened in 1933, is the fourth iteration.

Locks and river management
Hampton lies on the River Thames upstream of Molesely Lock and downstream of Sunbury Lock.
The River Thames has always been a key waterway for the supply of goods along its banks and in and out of London. In the 19th Century barges carrying up to 200 tons of material, hauled by men or horses along tow paths, were a common sight along the Hampton/Molesey Reach and an integral part of the river economy. As river traffic increased however, the ad hoc wooden weirs and dams constructed to maintain the river level became unsatisfactory. A lock was first proposed to solve the shallows at "Kenton Hedge and Sundbury Flatts above" in 1802, but it wasn't until 1812 that Parliament passed an act for the construction of a lock, and Molesey Lock was completed in 1815. There had been a weir at Sunbury to divert water for better navigation since 1789, and the first lock was opened in 1812. The lock was rebuilt downstream in 1856 following the construction of the Hampton Water Treatment Works. A second lock was opened in 1927.

Local Features
Hampton Water Treatment Works
The Hampton Water Treatment Works, currently owned and operated by Thames Water, occupy a 66 ha site located between Upper Sunbury Road (A308) and the River Thames. The Waterworks supply ~30% of London's fresh water. Construction of the Waterworks began in the 1850s as a joint venture between the Grand Junction Waterworks Company, the Southwark and Vauxhall Waterworks Company, and the West Middlesex Waterworks Company, following the passage of the 1852 Metropolis Water Act, which made it unlawful to take drinking water from the tidal Thames below Teddington Lock because of the amount of sewage in the tidal river. The original works were designed by Joseph Quick and J.W. Restler, and initially comprised sand filter beds to remove suspended solids from the river water, and three massive engine pump houses constructed in Gault brick, with large arched windows and decorative balustrades.  The site was expanded in the 1860s with additional filtration, water storage and steam driven pumping plant built. The last engine house on the site was completed in 1900, and with the establishment of filter beds between Belgrade Road and Rose Hill in the early 20th century (drained in the 1990s to become Hampton Green), the Waterworks came to dominate the southern and western sides of Hampton. The various water companies were amalgamated into the Metropolitan Water Board in 1902.
In addition to water abstracted locally from the Thames the works also receives water from other sources. Water is supplied via the Staines Reservoirs Aqueduct (built 1902) from the King George VI Reservoir (1947) and Staines Reservoirs (1902) which receive their water from the River Thames at Hythe End, just above Bell Weir Lock. The aqueduct passes, and transports water from, the Queen Mary Reservoir (1924) and the Water Treatment Works at Kempton Park, which used to be connected to Hampton via the Metropolitan Water Board Railway. Water was also supplied from the Knight and Bessborough Reservoirs (1907) and the Queen Elizabeth II Reservoir (1962) on the opposite (south) side of the Thames. The Hampton works is also the starting point of the Thames-Lea tunnel (1960) which transfers water to the reservoirs in the Lea Valley.
The Sunnyside Reservoir and the Stain Hill Reservoirs  are sites of Metropolitan Importance for Nature Conservation and contain flower-rich grassland and habitats for water birds. The extensive areas of open water, especially the Grand Junction Reservoir in the north-west of the site, are used by large numbers of birds, particularly in winter. Most of the site is still in operational use so marginal vegetation, where it occurs, is generally sparse. However, the grasslands surrounding the filter beds and buildings are among the most herb-rich grasslands in the Borough and contain several scarce London species often associated with chalk grassland.

Garrick's Villa and Garrick's Temple to Shakespeare
Garrick's Villa
David Garrick, a renowned 18th century actor and playwright, purchased Hampton House, an established country house facing the Thames on the road to Hampton Court, in 1754. Numerous alterations were made to the house during Garrick's residence by the neoclassical architect Robert Adam, including an imposing portico, the building of an orangery and the construction of a tunnel under the road to connect with his riverside lawn. The house became known as Garrick's Villa, and received Grade I listing in 1952.

Garrick's Temple to Shakespeare
In 1755 Garrick commissioned an (unknown) architect to construct a garden folly as a temple to his muse, William Shakespeare. The architect designed an octagonal domed building modelled on the Pantheon in the Classical style with an Ionic portico, to be constructed in the villa's riverside garden. The temple's interior was furnished as a shrine to Shakespeare, exhibiting Garrick's collection of Shakespearean relics, and used by Garrick quite place to study, learn lines and entertain guests. Garrick's collection was sold on the death of his widow, but the temple was preserved and restored, becoming known as Garrick's Temple to Shakespeare, and also receiving Grade I listing in 1952.  Garrick's Temple is now a museum, concert venue and educational facility, open to the public on Sunday afternoons in the summer.

Roy Grove cannon and the Anglo-French geodetic survey
A cannon in Roy Grove marks the Hampton end of the baseline measured in 1784 by General William Roy in preparation of the Anglo-French Survey (1784–1790) to measure the relative situation of Greenwich Observatory and Paris Observatory. This high precision survey was the forerunner of the Principal Triangulation of Great Britain which commenced in 1791, one year after Roy's death. In the report of the operation Roy gives the locations of the ends of the baseline as  Hampton Poor-house and King's Arbour. The latter lies with the confines of Heathrow Airport. The exact end points of the baseline were originally made by two vertical pipes which carried flag-poles but in 1791, when the base was remeasured, the ends were marked  by two cannons sunk into the ground.

Other notable features
Rosehill and Hampton Library
Rosehill is a prominent 18th century Grade II Listed stock-brick built house on the Upper Sunbury Road. Built for the celebrated 18th century tenor John Beard, it was purchased by the Urban District Council (UDC) in 1902 and used as Council Offices and Library until 1937 when Hampton Council was joined with Twickenham and Teddington, and the whole house was given over for use as the Hampton Library. The building sports blue plaques for former residents, the singer John Beard and William Ewart MP, the Politician behind the Public Libraries Act 1850.

Hampton Youth Project
Hampton Youth Project is a youth centre established in Tangley Park in 1990. Built in a converted coach depot on the Nurserylands Estate it offers a wide programme of activities for those aged 11–19.

Beveree wildlife site
The Beveree Wildlife Site to the north of Station Road is a Site of Local Importance for Nature Conservation. It is a small secluded area of green open space, mixed woodland, self-seeded fruit trees, scrub, two small meadows, and orchard trees.

Tagg's Island sundial
In the park of St Albans Riverside beside the bridge leading to Tagg's Island is a sundial, "a globe with numbered longitude fins and tropic latitudes, resting on three balls, all upon a bell-shaped base" designed by David Harber.

Hampton Cemetery
Hampton Cemetery is a cemetery on Hollybush Lane in Hampton. The cemetery was opened in 1879, and fourteen Commonwealth servicemembers of World War I and seven of World War II are buried in the cemetery.

Sport and leisure
Football
Hampton & Richmond Borough F.C. are a semi-professional club playing at step 2 of Non-League football in the National League South. The club has played at Beveree Stadium (capacity: 3,500) since 1959.

Rugby
Twickenham Rugby Football Club can trace its establishment to 1867, and moved to its current home ground at Parkfields west of Hampton in 1930.

Cricket
Hampton's first cricket club, the Royal Clarence Cricket Club, was founded in 1828. Sponsored by its patron the Duke of Clarence, the club played its matches on what is now Hurst Park in Molesey.Hampton Hill Cricket Club was established in 1855 (as New Hampton Cricket Club) and moved to its present ground in Bushy Park in 1890. The Club also plays at Carlisle Park in Hampton.

Sailing
The River Thames widens at Hampton Reach, and the prevailing south-westerly breeze over Hurst Park makes the river an attactive venue for sailing. Benn's Island was occupied by the Thames Valley Sailing Club in the 19th Century, and since 1945 has been leased by the Hampton Sailing Club, which operates a clubhouse and boatyard. The club's racing course runs from upstream of Platt's Eyot down to Tagg's Island.

Rowing
A Watermen's Regatta was first run at Hampton in 1835, and which ran until 1910, becoming an informal entertainment (including water jousting and canoe polo) in its final years.Molesey Boat Club has operated the Molesey Regatta since 1867. For much of its early history, the race course finished downriver from Garrick's Temple, with crowds and officials massing on Garrick's Lawn. The current race course follows an 850 metre course starting upstream of Platt's Eyot and finishing opposite the Waterworks and Hurst Park.The rowing clubs of Hampton School and Lady Eleanor Holles School jointly operate the Millennium Boathouse, opposite the upstream end of Platt's Eyot on the north bank of the Thames. Both clubs have produced multiple British school champions, competitors in the Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race, and international representatives.

Canoeing
Originally founded as the Westel Club in 1970, Hampton Canoe Club has operated from the old pumping station at Bell Hill since 1990.

Hampton Pool
Hampton Heated Open Air Pool and Gym near Bushy Park was built in 1922 after plans approved in 1914 were delayed due to the outbreak of the First World War. A diving pit and filtration system was added in 1939, and the pool widened in 1961. The pool was closed in 1980 due to financial reasons, and re-opened with community support in 1985, with management transferred to a dedicated charity.

Hampton in art, literature and other media
Art
Alfred Sisley
In 1874 Anglo-French Impressionist painter Alfred Sisley sought refuge in England from the Franco-Prussian war at the invitation of baritone Jean-Baptist Faure. Sisley settled in Hampton Court in the summer of 1874, painting a series of paintings along the banks of the River Thames around Hampton Court and Molesey.
Regatta at Molesey near Hampton Court features the Molesey Regatta, with the recently-constructed Island Hotel visible on Tagg's Island in the background. The Thames with Hampton Church shows the view upriver from Molesey towards Hampton, featuring St Mary's Church and Garrick's Temple to Shakespeare.

Camille Pissarro
French Impressionist painter Camille Pissarro made several visits to London over his lifetime, most notably in 1870-71 following the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian war. During a short visit to visit his son George in May–June 1890 Pissarro painted six canvases of various London outdoor scenes (including Charing Cross Bridge, Old Chelsea Bridge and Primrose Hill, London). Among these works was Hampton Court Green, depicting a cricket match on the green.

Literature
Anthony Trollope
The 1857 novel The Three Clerks by Anthony Trollope is set in Hampton, which was then a village on the western outskirts of London.

Charles Dickens
Hampton features in two Charles Dickens novels. In Oliver Twist, Oliver and Bill Sikes stop in a public house in Hampton on their way to the planned burglary in Chertsey.  

In Nicholas Nickleby, Sir Mulberry Hawk and Lord Frederick visit the 'Hampton Races', which refers to a racecourse at 'Moulsey Hurst'.

H.G. Wells
H.G. Wells moved to Woking in 1895 after his marriage to Catherine Robbins. Wells planned and wrote The War of the Worlds while living in Woking, which mentions Hampton Court in Chapter 14 of Part I:

T.S. Eliot
In 1936, T.S. Eliot sought respite from the intrigues of London's literary circles (and his wife Vivien) by holing up at the Bell Inn in Hampton, writing to his editor John Hayward under the nom-de-plume 'White Cargo'. Eliot's residence at the Bell Inn led to a reference in Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats.

Other
Hampton is also mentioned in humorist Jerome K. Jerome's Three Men in a Boat.

Other media
In 24: Live Another Day terrorist Margot Al-Harazi's first hideout is stated to be in Hampton.
Serial killer Levi Bellfield murdered Marsha McDonnell near her home in Hampton on 4 February 2003.
The streetscape on Station Road, Hampton near the old Police Station has been used as a backdrop for TV series including Fleabag and The Gold.

Notable inhabitants
Living people
Evgeny Lebedev, the Baron Lebedev, of Hampton in the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames and of Siberia in the Russian Federation, owner of Stud House
Hayley Mills (born 1946), actress, lived on Belgrade Road, in Hampton with her son Crispian Mills (born 1973), singer, songwriter, guitarist and film director
Bill Milner (born 1995), actor, lives with his family in Hampton
Brian May (born 1947), musician and astrophysicist, born in Hampton

Historical figures
Residents of Hampton and Hampton Court
John Beard (c.1717–1791), tenor singer, lived at what is now Hampton Branch Library, Rose Hill, Hampton. The site is marked by a blue plaque.
R D Blackmore (1825–1900), novelist, author of Lorna Doone, lived at 25 Lower Teddington Road, Hampton Wick,  whilst he had Gomer House in Teddington (since demolished) built for him.
John Blow (1649–1708), composer, built a house for himself in the High Street. It was demolished in 1799 and was on the site of the present-day house known as Beveree.
Julian Bream (1933–2020), lutenist and classical guitarist, grew up in Hampton.
Sir Richard Doll (1912–2005), epidemiologist, was born in Hampton.
William Ewart (1798–1791), promoter of public libraries, lived at what is now Hampton Branch Library, Rose Hill, Hampton. The site is marked by a blue plaque.
Sir Francis Mark Farmer (1866–1922), a dental surgeon who worked on facial reconstruction, lived in Belgrade Road.
David Garrick (1717–1779), actor, lived at Garrick's Villa, Hampton Court Road, Hampton.
Harry Hampton VC (1870–1922) was born in Crown Terrace, Richmond and died in Twickenham. He is buried in Richmond Old Cemetery.
Norman Cyril Jackson VC (1919–1994) died in Hampton Hill and is buried in Twickenham Cemetery.
W. E. Johns (1893-1968) was an English First World War pilot, and writer of the Biggles stories, who died at Park House, Hampton Court.
Edward Lapidge (1779–1860), who held the post of County Surveyor of Surrey and designed the present Kingston Bridge, was born in Hampton Wick, where he also designed a number of churches.
Jessie Matthews (1907-1981), famous actress, singer and dancer from the 1920s to the post-WWII era, resided at The Old House, Marlborough Road, Hampton.
Vic Mitchell (1934–2021), author and publisher, was born in Hampton.
Princess Sophia Duleep Singh (1876-1948), British suffragette, daughter of deposed Maharaja Duleep Singh, and goddaughter of Queen Victoria, was granted a grace and favour residence by the Queen at Faraday House (then part of the Hampton Court estate) in 1896. The site is marked by a blue plaque.
John Templeton (1802–1886), opera singer, lived at 114 High Street, Hampton Hill.
Alan Turing (1912–1954) lived at Ivy House (which now has a blue plaque) in Hampton High Street between 1945 and 1947 while working at the National Physical Laboratory in Teddington.
Sir Christopher Wren (1632–1723), lived at The Old Court House, Hampton Court Green. The site is marked by a blue plaque.

Residents of Hampton Court Palace
Queen Anne lived at Hampton Court Palace and continued William and Mary's decoration and completion of its state apartments.
Lancelot "Capability" Brown (1716–1783), is commemorated with an English Heritage blue plaque at Wilderness House, Hampton Court Palace. He lived there from 1764, when he was appointed Chief Gardener at the palace, until his death in 1783.
Charles I lived at Richmond Palace and at Hampton Court while the plague raged in London. He was held prisoner at Hampton Court in 1647.
Charles II lived at Hampton Court in 1665 to escape the plague in London.
George I commissioned the completion of six rooms at Hampton Court Palace to the design of John Vanbrugh.
Henry VIII married Catherine Parr, his sixth wife, at Hampton Court.
Mary I and her consort, Philip II of Spain, spent their honeymoon at Hampton Court and Richmond.
Jane Seymour, Henry VIII's third wife, gave birth to the future Edward VI of England at Hampton Court Palace and died two weeks later at Richmond Palace.
William, Duke of Gloucester, son of the future Queen Anne and Prince George of Hanover, was born at Hampton Court in 1689
William III and Mary II rebuilt parts of Hampton Court Palace.
Thomas Wolsey, Cardinal Wolsey (1473–1530), lived at Hampton Court.
Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia, sister of Tsar Nicholas II, lived at Wilderness Lodge, in the grounds of Hampton Court Palace, from 1937 until her death in 1960.

Local amenities
Education
As a predominantly residential suburb, Hampton has a significant number of primary and secondary schools.

Secondary schools
Hampton High (previously Hampton Academy, Hampton Community College, Rectory School), a co-educational academy
Turing House School, a co-educational academy
Hampton School, an independent school for boys
Lady Eleanor Holles School, an independent school for girls
Hampton Court House, an independent co-educational school

Primary and infants schools
Hampton Junior School
Hampton Infant School and Nursery
Hampton Hill Junior School
Carlisle Infants School
Buckingham Primary School
Hampton Prep School (formerly Denmead), the junior school for Hampton School
Twickenham Prep School
Jack & Jill School (incorporating Nightingale House and Clarence House)
St. Mary's Hampton CE Primary School

Churches
Church buildings are a significant presence in the area, with the listed St Mary's Church and St James's Church standing out against the surrounding 20th century housing.

Local churches include:

Hampton Methodist Church, Hampton (incorporating Hampton Baptist Church).
Hampton Hill United Reformed Church, Hampton Hill
St Theodore's Roman Catholic Church, Hampton
St Francis de Sales, Hampton Hill and Upper Teddington (Roman Catholic)
All Saints (Church of England), Old Farm Road, Hampton
St Mary (Church of England), Church Street (by Thames Street) Hampton
St James' Church, Hampton Hill (Church of England)The Christian churches in Hampton and Hampton Hill work together as Churches Together around Hampton.

Transport
RoadsIn keeping with its lack of high rise buildings, the district has no dual carriageways, its main routes the A308 and A312, have in their busiest sections an additional filter or bus lane.
Bus routes that serve Hampton are the 111, 216, R68 and R70. The 411 and 285 serve Hampton Court and Hampton Hill respectively.
RailHampton railway station is towards the south-west and by the main parades of shops on either side of the line; just north of Hampton Hill is Fulwell railway station; both are on the Shepperton Branch Line.  Just south of Hampton Court neighbourhood, clustered about the Tudor, Stuart and Georgian Palace and Gardens is Hampton Court railway station on the Hampton Court branch line. Hampton Wick railway station is on the Kingston loop line.  The London terminus for both lines is London Waterloo.

Demography and housing
2011 Census ethnicities
In all three wards, White British is the largest ethnic group, ranging between 73.1 per cent in Hampton North to 79.6 per cent in Hampton. The second largest ethnicity in all three wards is Other White, between 7 and 8 per cent. The third largest ethnicity is Indian in Hampton; Other Asian in Hampton North; and White Irish in Fulwell and Hampton.

Nearest places
Twickenham
Sunbury
Fulwell
Hanworth
Teddington
Whitton
West Molesey
East Molesey
Esher
Hampton Wick
Kingston

Notes and references
Notes
References

External links
Media related to Hampton at Wikimedia Commons  London portal
The Hampton Society
Borough of Twickenham Local History Society
One Hampton Archived 21 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine
Our Hampton
Hampton People's Network Archived 9 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine
The Thames from Hampton Court to Sunbury Lock – Hampton Waterworks
The Twickenham Museum

Further reading
Gerald Heath, Hampton Court: the Story of a Village, The Hampton Court Association, 2000
Andrew Sargeant, The Story of the Thames, Amberley Publishing, 2013
John Sheaf and Ken Howe, Hampton and Teddington Past, Historical Publications, 1995
John Sheaf, The highways and byways of Hampton: a short history of every street in Hampton, Borough of Twickenham Local History Society, 2009
Kathy Whte and Peter Foster, Bushy Park: Royals, Rangers and Rogues, Foundry Press, 1997