In computer science, hardness of approximation is a field  that studies the algorithmic complexity of finding near-optimal solutions to optimization problems.

Scope
Hardness of approximation complements the study of approximation algorithms by proving, for certain problems, a limit on the factors with which their solution can be efficiently approximated. Typically such limits show a factor of approximation beyond which a problem becomes NP-hard, implying that finding a polynomial time approximation for the problem is impossible unless NP=P. Some hardness of approximation results, however, are based on other hypotheses, a notable one among which is the unique games conjecture.

History
Since the early 1970s it was known that many optimization problems could not be solved in polynomial time unless P = NP, but in many of these problems the optimal solution could be efficiently approximated to a certain degree. In the 1970s, Teofilo F. Gonzalez and Sartaj Sahni began the study of hardness of approximation, by showing that certain optimization problems were NP-hard even to approximate to within a given approximation ratio. That is, for these problems, there is a threshold such that any polynomial-time approximation with approximation ratio beyond this threshold could be used to solve NP-complete problems in polynomial time.  In the early 1990s, with the development of PCP theory, it became clear that many more approximation problems were hard to approximate, and that (unless P = NP) many known approximation algorithms achieved the best possible approximation ratio.
Hardness of approximation theory deals with studying the approximation threshold of such problems.

Examples
For an example of an NP-hard optimization problem that is hard to approximate, see set cover.

See also
PCP theorem

References
Further reading
Trevisan, Luca (July 27, 2004), Inapproximability of Combinatorial Optimization Problems (PDF)

External links
CSE 533: The PCP Theorem and Hardness of Approximation, Autumn 2005, syllabus from the University of Washington, Venkatesan Guruswami and Ryan O'Donnell