Herpetology (from Greek ἑρπετόν herpetón, meaning "reptile" or "creeping animal") is the branch of zoology concerned with the study of amphibians (including frogs, toads, salamanders, newts, and caecilians (gymnophiona)) and reptiles (including snakes, lizards, amphisbaenids, turtles, terrapins, tortoises, crocodilians, and tuataras). Birds, which are cladistically included within Reptilia, are traditionally excluded here; the scientific study of birds is the subject of ornithology.The definition of herpetology can be more precisely stated as the study of ectothermic (cold-blooded) tetrapods. This definition "herps" (or sometimes "herptiles" or "herpetofauna") excludes fish, but it is not uncommon for herpetological and ichthyological scientific societies to collaborate. Examples include publishing joint journals and holding conferences to foster the exchange of ideas between the fields, as the American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists does. Herpetological societies are formed to promote interest in reptiles and amphibians, both captive and wild.
Herpetological studies can offer benefits relevant to humanity-centric fields by researching of the role of amphibians and reptiles in global ecology. Examples: by monitoring amphibians that are very sensitive to environmental changes, herpetologists record visible warnings that significant changes in climate are taking place. Some toxins and venoms produced by reptiles and amphibians are useful in human medicine. Currently, some snake venom has been used to create anti-coagulants that work to treat strokes and heart attacks.

Naming and etymology
The word herpetology is from Greek: ἑρπετόν, herpetón, "creeping animal" and -λογία, -logia, "knowledge". People with an avid interest in herpetology and who keep different reptiles or amphibians often refer to themselves as "herpers"."Herp" is a vernacular term for non-avian reptiles and amphibians. It is derived from the old term "herpetile", with roots back to Linnaeus's classification of animals, in which he grouped reptiles and amphibians together in the same class. There are over 6700 species of amphibians and over 9000 species of reptiles. In spite of its modern taxonomic irrelevance, the term has persisted, particularly in the names of herpetology, the scientific study of non-avian reptiles and amphibians, and herpetoculture, the captive care and breeding of reptiles and amphibians.

Subfields
The field of herpetology can be divided into areas dealing with particular taxonomic groups such as frogs (batrachology), snakes (ophiology or ophidiology), lizards (saurology) or turtles (cheloniology, chelonology, or testudinology).More generally, herpetologists work on functional problems in the ecology, evolution, physiology, behavior, etc. of amphibians and reptiles. Amphibians or reptiles can be used as model organisms for specific questions in these fields, such as the role of frogs in the ecology of a wetland. All of these areas are related through their evolutionary history, an example being the evolution of viviparity (including behavior and reproduction).

Careers
Career options in the field of herpetology include, but are not limited to, lab research, field studies and survey, assistance in veterinary and medical procedures, zoological staff, museum staff, and college teaching.In modern academic science, it is rare for individuals to consider themselves a herpetologist first and foremost. Most individuals focus on a particular field such as ecology, evolution, taxonomy, physiology, or molecular biology, and within that field ask questions pertaining to or best answered by examining reptiles and amphibians. For example, an evolutionary biologist who is also a herpetologist may choose to work on an issue such as the evolution of warning coloration in coral snakes.Modern herpetological writers include Mark O'Shea and Philip Purser. Modern herpetological showmen include Jeff Corwin, Steve Irwin, popularly known as the "Crocodile Hunter", and the star Austin Stevens, popularly known as "Austin Snakeman" in the TV series Austin Stevens: Snakemaster.
Herpetology is an established hobby around the world due to the varied biodiversity in many environments. Many amateur herpetologists coin themselves "herpers".

Study
Most colleges or universities do not offer a major in herpetology at the undergraduate or in the graduate level. Instead, persons interested in herpetology select a major in the biological sciences. The knowledge learned about all aspects of the biology of animals is then applied to an individual study of herpetology.

Journals
Herpetology research is published in academic journals including Ichthyology & Herpetology, founded in 1913 (under the name Copeia in honour of Edward Drinker Cope); Herpetologica, founded in 1936; Reptiles and amphibians, founded in 1990; and Contemporary Herpetology, founded in 1997 and stopped publishing in 2008.

See also
Herping
List of herpetologists
List of herpetology academic journals
Reptile Database
AmphibiaWeb

References
Further reading
Adler, Kraig (1989). Contributions to the History of Herpetology. Society for the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles (SSAR).
Eatherley, Dan (2015). Bushmaster: Raymond Ditmars and the Hunt for the World's Largest Viper. New York: Arcade. 320 pp. ISBN 978-1628725117.
Goin, Coleman J.; Goin, Olive B.; Zug, George R. (1978). Introduction to Herpetology, Third Edition. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Company. xi + 378 pp. ISBN 0-7167-0020-4.

External links

Iranian Herpetological Studies Institute (IHSI)
Field Herpetology Guide
American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists
Herpetological Conservation and Biology
Societas Europaea Herpetologica Distribution Maps for European Reptiles and Amphibians
Center for North American Herpetology over 500 species of reptiles and amphibians
European Field Herping Community
New Zealand Herpetology Archived 2007-10-20 at the Wayback Machine
Chicago Herpetological Society
Biology of the Reptilia is an online copy of the full text of a 22-volume 13,000-page summary of the state of research of reptiles.
HerpMapper is a database of reptile and amphibian sightings
Amphibian and Reptile Atlas of Peninsular California, San Diego Natural History Museum
A Primer on Reptiles and Amphibians
Field Herp Forum