Hotel Ezra Cornell (HEC) is an annual weekend-long educational conference put on by the students of the Cornell School of Hotel Administration for leaders of the hospitality industry. Composed of educational seminars, leisure activities, and food and beverage events, the program is currently in its 97th year, predating the School of Hotel Administration and making HEC one of the oldest organizations at Cornell University. The purpose of the weekend is for students to practice the skills they have learned in the classroom and to showcase their talents to industry professionals, many of whom are Cornell alumni.
HEC is planned, managed, and staffed entirely by students. Over the course of one academic year, the student Board of Directors, assistant directors, and managers plan all of the details of HEC, and during the weekend, over 300 students are involved with executing program events. All aspects of the program, including food preparation and service, program marketing, event design, and the turndown service at night, are handled by students, with faculty members acting only as advisers.

History of HEC
HEC has its origins in 1925, when Professor Howard Meek, who would later serve as the first Dean of the School of Hotel Administration, took a group of students to New York City to manage the Hotel Astor for a day.  Upon returning to Ithaca, the students decided to hold the grand opening of "The Only Hotel for a Day" to demonstrate that hospitality management could be taught in an academic setting, and organized an extravagant formal dinner party for hospitality industry leaders. Lacking an event space of its own, the inaugural Hotel Ezra Cornell was held on May 7, 1926 in Risley Hall on Cornell's campus. The second year of HEC was a turning point in the history of Cornell's hospitality program, and featured one of the world's leading hoteliers, Ellsworth Milton Statler, as a guest of honor to assess the quality of Cornell's nascent hospitality program. At the main banquet, Statler commented, "I'm converted. Meek can have any damn thing he wants," an moment traditionally held to mark the founding of the School of Hotel Administration.As the School of Hotel Administration gained prominence, future HECs became more elaborate, with each year adopting a unique theme that informed program events. An example of this practice was HEC 60, which was themed "Diamond Robbery" and styled as a mystery theater. The whole weekend was centered on solving a fictitious diamond robbery, with each social event providing clues. Such themed events were gradually phased out with HEC 77, when the focus of the weekend shifted from socializing to learning and was modeled after existing hospitality industry conferences, with a greater emphasis on guest speakers and panelists.
Students coined the tag line "The Best Ever" to describe how their HEC would top all previous HECs.

Important dates in the HEC timeline
1926: HEC 1
1927: E.M. Statler pledges support
1938: HEC is dedicated to Howard Meek, who will later serve as the first Dean of the School of Hotel Administration
1943: 20th Anniversary of hotel program, announcement that Statler Foundation would support new facility for school
1950: The cornerstone of Statler Hall is laid
1951: Meek is named director of hotel program; the new Statler Hall opens
1955: The Hotel School becomes an independent unit
1962: Meek’s last year, HEC is dedicated to him
1972: Educational focus introduced
1980: Formal dinner becomes multiple dinners—guests get to choose which dinner to attend
1988 & 1989: Statler Hotel undergoes renovation, so HEC is held all over campus
1990: Grand Opening of Statler Hotel and J. Willard Marriott Executive Education Center, with a record number of industry leaders in attendance
2005: First year with HEC to be held in the Robert A. and Jan M. Beck Center

Notable guests
Ken Blanchard - Owner, Ken Blanchard Companies, Author, One Minute Manager; Management consultant
Chris Cahill - President/COO, Fairmont Hotels
Simon Cooper - COO, Ritz Carlton
Stoddard Crane - VP of Business Growth, Darden Restaurants
Matthew J. Hart - President/COO, Hilton Hotels Corporation
Wolf Hengst - President, Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts
Conrad Hilton - Founder, Hilton Hotels Corporation
Howard Deering Johnson - Founder, Howard Johnson's Hotels
Bill Marriott - Executive Chairman and former CEO of Marriott Hotels
David Neeleman - CEO, JetBlue
Drew Nieporent - President, Myriad Restaurant Group
Timothy Ryan - President, The Culinary Institute of America (CIA)
Burton “Skip” Sack - Chairman, National Restaurant Association (NRA)
John Sharpe - Former President/COO, Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts
William Shaw - President/COO, Marriott International
Barry Sternlicht - CEO, Starwood Capital Group
Ted Teng - President/CEO, The Leading Hotels of the World
Jonathan Tisch - President/CEO, Loews Hotels
Stephen Weisz - President, Marriott Vacation Club International
Steve Wynn - Chairman, Wynn Resorts
Anthony Capuano - CEO, Marriott International
Keith Barr - CEO, InterContinental Hotels Group

References
External links
The official Hotel Ezra Cornell website, with up-to-date information on the annual event
https://www.facebook.com/HotelEzraCornell
https://twitter.com/HtlEzraCornell