An Internet appliance is a consumer device whose main function is easy access to Internet services such as WWW or e-mail. The term was popularized in the 1990s, when it somewhat overlapped in meaning with an information appliance, Internet computer, network computer, or even thin client, but now it has fallen out of general use.
Internet appliance was contrasted with any general purpose computer. The basic design idea behind Internet appliance is that it can be made cheaper and much more usable by narrowing its functionality and limiting available configuration options. Modern smart phones and tablet computers do approximately the same things, but are more powerful, more successful in the market, and generally not classified as Internet appliances.

History
The first appliances to be marketed successfully gave constant information on the weather or on the state of the stock market, by means of changes in colors or by using analog gauges. Internet appliances were promoted by a variety of technology companies during the 1990s but, as the price of full-featured computers dropped, never met the market expectations. Jim Louderback would later describe the concept as one of the "eight biggest tech flops ever".
An Internet tablet is a type of a mobile Internet appliance. Examples include the Sony Airboard and the Nokia Internet Tablet series (including the Nokia N900).
Early in the 21st century a new breed of household devices, such as Vonage Internet Phones, PenguinRadio's Internet radio, and IPTV boxes, began to use the broadband connections in PC-independent ways.

Notable devices
Current
aigo MID
Chromebook
Litl Webbook
MailBug
Personal Internet Communicator

Discontinued
3Com Audrey
Amstrad E-mailer
CIDCo Mivo/MailStation
Compaq iPAQ
ePod
GlobalPC
i-Opener
MSN Companion
MSN TV
New Internet Computer
Nokia 770 Internet Tablet
Nokia N800
Nokia N810
Nokia N900
Pepper Pad
Sony Airboard
Sony eVilla
Sony Mylo
Virgin Webplayer
VTech Companion

See also
Computer appliance
Ubiquitous computing
Mobile Internet Device (MID)
Server appliance
Netbook

References
External links

Linux-Hacker.net Community Page pertaining to getting Linux to run on older Internet Appliances