The Journal of Consciousness Studies is an interdisciplinary peer-reviewed academic journal dedicated entirely to the field of consciousness studies. It is published by Imprint Academic, and was founded in 1994. It was previously edited by Joseph Goguen, and later by Professor Valerie Gray Hardcastle of the University of Cincinnati. The Journal of Consciousness Studies is currently edited by Graham Horsewell.

Background
The journal was established in part to provide visibility across disciplines to various researchers approaching the problem of consciousness from their respective fields. The articles are usually in non-specialized language (in contrast to a typical academic journal) in order to make them accessible to those in other disciplines. This also serves to help make them accessible to laypersons.
In contrast to many other journals, it attempts to incorporate fields beyond the realm of the natural sciences and the social sciences such as the humanities, philosophy, critical theory, and comparative religion.

Content
From time to time, the journal publishes collections of thematically or topically related academic papers. These often take the form of a double issue. Recent issues of the Journal of Consciousness Studies cover topics such as animal consciousness, emotional consciousness, grief, indigenous philosophies of consciousness, and introspection. 

Some examples of articles published in the journal:

"The Astonishing Hypothesis" (1994) - Francis Crick & J. Clark
"Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" (1995) - David Chalmers
"Illusionism as the Obvious Default Theory of Consciousness" (2016) - Daniel Dennett
"The Real Problem(s) with Panpsychism" (2021) - Anil Seth
"Is the Sun Conscious?" (2021) - Rupert Sheldrake
"What Forms Could Introspective Systems Take? A Research Programme" (2023) - Francois Kammerer and Keith Frankish.
The journal reports on conferences, notably the Toward a Science of Consciousness (TSC) conference, which is organized by the Center for Consciousness Studies based at the University of Arizona in Tucson. See, for example, TSC 2012.Papers from the first Online Consciousness Conference were published in a special issue of JCS in April 2010.

References
External links
Official website