Body horror, biological horror, organic horror or visceral horror is horror fiction in which the horror is principally derived from the unnatural graphic transformation, degeneration or destruction of the physical body. Such works may deal with decay, disease, deformity, parasitism, mutation or mutilation. Other types of body horror include unnatural movements or the anatomically incorrect placement of limbs to create "monsters" from human body parts. David Cronenberg, Frank Henenlotter, Brian Yuzna, Stuart Gordon, Lloyd Kaufman, and Clive Barker are notable directors of this genre. The term body horror was coined with the "Body Horror" theme issue of the University of Glasgow film journal Screen (vol. 27, no. 1, January–February 1986), which contains several essays on the subject.

Notable films and television series
Notable writers
In his introduction to The Mammoth Book of Body Horror, the film director Stuart Gordon says that "Body Horror has been with us since long before there were movies". According to the summary of this anthology, the important writers of Body Horror are :

Mary Shelley
Edgar Allan Poe
H. P. Lovecraft
John W. Campbell
George Langelaan
Richard Matheson
Stephen King
Clive Barker
Robert Bloch
Ramsey Campbell
Brian Lumley
Nancy A. Collins
Richard Christian Matheson
Michael Marshall Smith
Neil Gaiman
James Herbert
Christopher Fowler
Alice Henderson
Graham Masterton
Gemma Files
Simon Clark
Barbie Wilde
David Moody
Axelle Carolyn
Tony Vilgotsky
H. G. WellsBut others names could be quoted, according to Xavier Aldana Reyes in his book Body Gothic :

Poppy Z. Brite
Kathe Koja
Dennis Cooper
Bret Easton Ellis

Notable graphic novels
Use in video games
In recent years, the subjects of human experimentation, medical research, and infection have played large roles in video games whose plots are heavily influenced by themes common in body horror.

Use in tabletop gaming
See also
Biopunk
New Extremity
New Gothic
Organ transplantation in fiction
Psychological horror

References
External links
Inside Out: Body Horror
Internet Movie Database films listed under keyword body-horror