This article includes a list of Cornell University fraternities and sororities. The Cornell University Greek system dates to the first months of university operation during the autumn of 1868. Cornell's co-founder and first president, Andrew Dickson White was a strong promoter of fraternities as a means of teaching self-governance to young students. Among its leaders, other strong supporters of the Greek system were Presidents Edmund Ezra Day and Frank H.T. Rhodes.
Among general ("social") organizations, Cornell currently recognizes 31 Interfraternity Council fraternities, twelve Panhellenic Association sororities, and twelve Multicultural Greek and Fraternal Council fraternities and sororities.

Interfraternity Council
Fraternities constituting the Interfraternity Council (IFC) are listed by dates of local founding and noted with national conference membership where applicable. As of 2023, there are two gender-neutral and 29 male-only fraternities. Fraternities may be suspended ("de-recognized") or closed for disciplinary or other reasons as determined by the IFC, governing bodies including national organizations, and/or the University. Dormant houses, which include both closed fraternities and/or those that have forfeited their housing, are italicized. Active houses, including those that have been suspended for a year or less are in bold..

Active chapters
NIC indicates current members of the North American Interfraternity Conference; PFA indicates current and former members of the Professional Fraternity Association; Unaffiliated indicates former members of the NIC.

Chapters whose names changed
Dormant chapters
Panhellenic Council
Sororities constituting the Panhellenic Council (PHC) are listed with dates of local founding and national conference membership, these are women's organizations, voluntarily coordinating their efforts within the PHC. As part of PHC or national organization self-governance, or University disciplinary action, chapters may be suspended ("de-recognized") or closed for a time. If a chapter is closed and/or forfeits its housing, it will be listed as a dormant chapter. Active groups are in bold, and dormant groups are in italics. See the Office of Student Life for current PHA members.

NPC indicates members of the National Panhellenic Conference.

Active chapters
Chapters whose names changed
Multicultural Greek & Fraternal Council
Sororities and Fraternities constituting the Multicultural Greek and Fraternal Council (MGFC) were originally affiliated with specific ethnicities or languages. Most of these organizations are now fully integrated as are the rest of Cornell's Greek letter organizations. All MGFC chapters are. Listed with dates of local founding and national conference membership, these are men's and women's organizations that voluntarily coordinate their efforts within the MGFC. As part of MGFC or University self-governance during disciplinary action, chapters may be suspended ("de-recognized") for a time. Unless the suspensions result in long-term closure of the chapter or forfeiture of a building, they should not be removed from this list. Active groups are in bold, and dormant groups are in italics. See the Office of Student Life for current MGFC members. The inter-Greek councils often cooperate on programs and policies, as do individual chapters from among the several Greek councils.

Men's fraternities
ΑΦΑ - Alpha Phi Alpha, 1906 (NPHC, NIC)
ΚΑΨ - Kappa Alpha Psi, 1978 (NPHC, NIC)
ΦΒΣ - Phi Beta Sigma, 1979 (NPHC, formerly NIC)
ΛΥΛ - Lambda Upsilon Lambda, 1982 (NALFO)
ΠΔΨ - Pi Delta Psi, 1998 (NAPA)
ΛΦΕ - Lambda Phi Epsilon, 1999 (NAPA, NIC)
MALIK - MALIK (fraternity), 2015

Women's fraternities and sororities
ΔΣΘ - Delta Sigma Theta, 1975 (NPHC)|
ΛΠΧ - Lambda Pi Chi, 1988 (NALFO)
ΣΓΡ - Sigma Gamma Rho, 1990 (NPHC)
ΣΛΥ - Sigma Lambda Upsilon, 1993 (NALFO)
αΚΔΦ - alpha Kappa Delta Phi, 1997 (NAPA) 
ΚΦΛ - Kappa Phi Lambda, 2000 (NAPA)
ΖΦΒ - Zeta Phi Beta, 2019 (NPHC)

Chapters whose names changed
Su Ye She, 1916–1917, Chinese men's group, see Rho Psi
Club Hispania, 1929–1931, local Hispanic men's group, see Phi Lambda Alpha
ΦΛΑ - Phi Lambda Alpha, 1931–1931, Hispanic men's group, see Phi Iota Alpha

Dormant chapters
ΑΖ - Alpha Zeta, 1890–1894, Hispanic men's group.
ΡΨ - Rho Psi, 1917–1931, Chinese men's group, no longer active at the collegiate level.: 16th ed  
ΦΙΑ - Phi Iota Alpha, 1931–1940? (NALFO, NIC), men's group
ΑΚΑ - Alpha Kappa Alpha, 1937–1940, 1952–2018 (NPHC), women's group, dormant.
ΩΨΦ - Omega Psi Phi, 1982–2019, (NPHC), men's group, dormant
ΛΘΦ - Lambda Theta Phi, 1995-20xx ? (NALFO, NIC), men's group, dormant.
ΩΦΒ - Omega Phi Beta, 1999–20xx ? (NALFO), women's group, dormant.
ΦΘΧ - Phi Theta Chi, 199x–20xx?, Latina, women's group
ΧΥΣ - Chi Upsilon Sigma, 2003–20xx ? (NALFO), women's group, dormant.
ΛΘΑ - Lambda Theta Alpha, 2004–20xx ? (NALFO), women's group, dormant.
ΙΦΘ - Iota Phi Theta, 2005-–20xx ? (NPHC, NIC), men's group, dormant.

Honor, professional, and service societies
These organizations have a similarly long pedigree on the Cornell campus but are largely non-residential. Members of the social and academic fraternities and sororities may join or be asked to join, as may non-Greek students. Multiple affiliations are allowable. The cut-off line where any campus organization falls within these headings or without is somewhat arbitrary; those formed before 1990 are listed under these subheadings in various volumes of the Baird's Manual of American College Fraternities, which for more than a century has been the data source of record for such organizations. Newer groups have been placed in categories that match Baird's categories. The latest, 1991 version of Bairds was published before the national development of some of the societies here, and therefore, position and inclusion are, in some cases, assumptive.

Honor and recognition societies
Honor societies recognize students who excel academically or as leaders among their peers, often within a specific academic discipline. Many honor societies invite students to become members based on scholastic rank (the top x% of a class) and/or grade point, either overall, or for classes taken within the discipline for which the honor society provides recognition. In cases where academic achievement would not be an appropriate criterion for membership, other standards are usually required for membership (such as completion of a particular ceremony or training program). These societies recognize past achievements. Pledging is not required, and new candidates may be immediately inducted into membership after meeting predetermined academic criteria and paying a one-time membership fee. Because of their purpose of recognition, most honor societies will have much higher academic achievement requirements for membership than professional societies. It is also common for a scholastic honor society to add a criterion relating to the character of the student. Some honor societies are invitation-only only while others allow unsolicited applications. Finally, membership in an honor society might be considered exclusive, i.e., a member of such an organization cannot join other honor societies representing the same field. Governance varies from faculty-guided to purely student-run.
Listed by date of local founding with national conference membership, these are co-ed, non-residential, achievement-based organizations that self-select members based on published criteria.

Active chapters
ACHS indicates members of the Association of College Honor Societies.

Dormant chapters
ACHS indicates members of the Association of College Honor Societies.Chancery, 1890-1980 ?, senior law honors, dormant.

Professional societies
Professional societies work to build friendship bonds among members, cultivate their strengths so that they may promote their profession, and provide mutual assistance in their shared areas of professional study.
Listed by date of local founding with national conference membership, these are primarily co-ed and non-residential organizations, of an array of professional interests. Membership in a professional fraternity may be the result of a pledge process, much like a social fraternity, and members are expected to remain loyal and active in the organization for life. Within the group of societies dedicated to a professional field of study, for example, law societies, membership is exclusive; however, these societies may initiate members who belong to other types of fraternities. Professional Societies are known for networking and post-collegiate involvement. Governance varies from faculty-managed to purely student-run.
Active chapters
PFA indicates members of the Professional Fraternity Association

Dormant chapters
PFA indicates members of the Professional Fraternity Association

Service societies
Service societies are listed with dates of local founding and national conference membership, if any; these are non-residential, co-ed organizations designed to provide campus and community service. These organizations are self-governed.

ΑΦΩ - Alpha Phi Omega, 1927 (PFA), service
Greeks Go Green, 20xx ?, local, environmentalism

Building and property ownership
Cornell University Residence Plan of 1966
During AY 1948-1949, Cornell University President Edmund Ezra Day formally distanced the University leadership from the increased discrimination that he observed at Cornell since 1910. His speech at the time marked the beginning of an effort to end such unlawful practices, a goal to which the University remains committed. Following hearings into discrimination within Cornell's system of private fraternities and sororities, fifteen fraternities liquidated private holdings and entered into the Cornell University Residence Plan of 1966, or CURP'66, an agreement which required all signatories to refrain from unlawful discrimination. The majority of CURP ’66 houses are on the Cornell West Campus. The Plan created a system of 'living and learning' in Small Residence.
Each Group House was to be maintained by a Priority Group electing its Group Sponsor. Phi Kappa Psi, for instance, sponsored Group House No. IV d/b/a/ The Irving Literary Society, and developed its parcel on Cornell's West Campus. Cornell desired an academic atmosphere in student residence “units” providing appropriate facilities for intellectual and cultural activities and by encouraging student participation in these pursuits. CURP ’66 was not simply the creation of University-owned fraternities and sororities, but a plan to provide a supplement to the University-maintained dormitory complex, the existing Cornell Greek System, off-campus apartments, and rooming houses. The vision was to organize “Small Residences” together, regardless of their national or local orientation as fraternities or cooperatives. The University program provided for no discrimination based on race, creed, color, or national origin. The issue of gender was addressed in the equal promotion of female, male, and gender-neutral Group Houses. In 1997, Cornell's president, Hunter Rawlings, reaffirmed the Board of Trustees' commitment to the Cornell University Residence Plan of 1966.The current CURP ’66 was created from an existing University leasing system dating to the 1881 decision by Andrew Dickson White to favor fraternities over dormitories. White thought fraternities “’[would] arouse in the students a feeling of responsibility both for the care of the property and for the reputation of the house . . . [and] fastens upon [students’] duties and responsibilities similar to those of men in the active world was among the better solutions of the problems [of] . . . students in American universities.’”: 33–34  White’s vision, in turn, developed from the professional analysis of American architect and planner, Frederick Law Olmsted, who saw the erection of residential clubhouses on Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act as a reform over the barracks-like dormitories used by existing American universities and colleges. Like White, Olmsted felt clubhouses maintained by the students would form part of the educational experience. They were to be modeled on the typical rural household of the era, small country villas thought to avoid the negative aspects of the Industrial Revolution.: 21–23 
CURP signatories

Chapters with university-owned facilities under other agreements
The Cornell University Residence Plan of 1966 was based on agreements with other institutions, dating from 1933 to 1952, and after 1965:

Chapters with privately owned facilities
Many fraternities and sororities have remained outside the ambit of University ownership. As of October 2017, these chapters include the following:

Notes
References
External links
Links to informational pages about all of the fraternities & sororities at Cornell
Fraternity & Sorority Life at Cornell University.
Map of Fraternities and Sororities of Cornell