This page provides general information about notable Linux distributions in the form of a categorized list. Distributions are organized into sections by the major distribution or package management system they are based on.

Debian-based
Debian Linux is a distribution that emphasizes free software. It supports many hardware platforms. Debian and distributions based on it use the .deb package format and the dpkg package manager and its frontends (such as apt or synaptic).

Ubuntu-based
Ubuntu is a distribution based on Debian, designed to have regular releases, a consistent user experience and commercial support on both desktops and servers.

Current official derivatives
These Ubuntu variants, also known as Ubuntu flavours, simply install a set of packages different from the original Ubuntu, but since they draw additional packages and updates from the same repositories as Ubuntu, all of the same software is available for each of them.

Discontinued official derivatives
Unofficial derivatives
Unofficial variants and derivatives are not controlled or guided by Canonical Ltd. and generally have different goals in mind.

Knoppix-based
Knoppix itself is based on Debian. It is a live distribution, with automated hardware configuration and a wide choice of software, which is decompressed as it loads from the drive.

Other Debian-based
Pacman-based
Pacman is a package manager that is capable of resolving dependencies and automatically downloading and installing all necessary packages. It is primarily developed and used by Arch Linux and its derivatives.

Arch Linux-based
Arch Linux is an independently developed, x86-64 general-purpose Linux distribution that strives to provide the latest stable versions of most software by following a rolling-release model. The default installation is a minimal base system, configured by the user to only add what is purposely required.

Other Pacman-based
RPM-based
Red Hat Linux and SUSE Linux were the original major distributions that used the .rpm file format, which today is used in several package management systems. Both of these were later divided into commercial and community-supported distributions. Red Hat Linux was divided into a community-supported but Red Hat-sponsored distribution named Fedora, and a commercially supported distribution called Red Hat Enterprise Linux, whereas SUSE Linux was divided into openSUSE and SUSE Linux Enterprise.

Fedora-based
Fedora is a community supported distribution. It aims to provide the latest software while maintaining a completely Free Software system.

RHEL-based
Red Hat Enterprise Linux is a commercial open-source Linux distribution developed by Red Hat for the commercial market.

Other Fedora-based
openSUSE-based
openSUSE is a community-developed Linux distribution, sponsored by SUSE. It maintains a strict policy of ensuring all code in the standard installs will be from FOSS solutions, including Linux kernel Modules. SUSE's enterprise Linux products are all based on the codebase that comes out of the openSUSE project.

Mandriva-based
Mandriva Linux is open-source distribution (with exceptions), discontinued in 2011. The first release was named Mandrake Linux and based on Red Hat Linux (version 5.1) and KDE 1 in July 1998. It had since moved away from Red Hat's distribution and became a completely separate distribution. The name was changed to Mandriva, which included a number of original tools, mostly to ease system configuration. Mandriva Linux was the brainchild of Gaël Duval, who wanted to focus on ease of use for new users. The last stable version was in 2011. Mandriva's developers moved to Mageia and OpenMandriva.

Other RPM-based
Gentoo-based
Gentoo is a distribution designed to have highly optimized and frequently updated software. Distributions based on Gentoo use the Portage package management system with emerge or one of the alternative package managers.

Slackware-based
Slackware is a highly customizable distribution that stresses ease of maintenance and reliability over cutting-edge software and automated tools. It is generally considered a distribution for advanced users.

Android-based
Android is a mobile operating system bought and currently being developed by Google, based on a Google modified Linux kernel and designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets.

Source-based
Other distributions
The following distributions have not been categorized under the preceding sections.

Historical distributions
See also
Comparison of Linux distributions
Comparison of netbook-oriented Linux distributions
DistroWatch
Linux on PowerPC
Linux on IBM Z
List of live CDs
List of router and firewall distributions

References
External links

Linux free distros (Free Software Foundation)
Repository tracking
The LWN.net Linux Distribution List – Categorized list with information about each entry.
Distrowatch – Announcements, information, links and popularity ranking for many Linux distributions.
Linux Distros – Information and ISO files for many oldest Linux distributions.