Mexican sex comedies (generally known as Ficheras film or Sexicomedias) are films within the comedy film genre of the Mexican cinema industry, though in a class of their own. The storylines typically revolve around themes of sexploitation and "Mexploitation". They are mostly recognized as low-quality films with fairly low budgets. The genre peaked in popularity in the 1970s and 1980s. Although the films had sexually suggestive plots and used numerous comedic innuendos and double entendres, they were not overtly explicit, and were never considered to be pornographic. Furthermore, it was not uncommon for the male characters in these films to comedically fail in their attempts to win over, or have sex with, the female characters. When a man was successful in wooing a woman, the performances were deliberately over-exaggerated and pantomime-like, aiming to generate laughter more than arousal. The genre is similar to, and possibly influenced by, Italian erotic comedies. The popular term "ficheras films" came from the film Las ficheras, produced and released in 1975, which told the stories and experiences of many dancing women who entertained men at nightclubs.
The settings and plots of these films tended to be simple, usually dealing with the sexual escapades of working-class Mexicans. The male leads were often construction workers, bricklayers, truck drivers or even unemployed petty scammers, while the female leads were often nightclub dancers, waitresses or prostitutes in small brothels. Other female lead roles included unfaithful wives, women with a busy sex life, or "everyday" women. The films were not generally appropriate for children, and frequently received classification as being unsuitable for minors under the age of 18.
Some of the films of this Mexican genre included El rey de las ficheras, La pulquería, Muñecas de medianoche, Bellas de noche, and Entre ficheras anda el diablo.
The best-known Mexican and international actors and actresses who were known to have participated in ficheras films were:

Sasha Montenegro
Angélica Chaín
Andrés García
Mauricio Garcés
Lina Santos
Lyn May
Marcia Bell
Leticia Perdigón
Carmen Salinas
Alfonso Zayas
Jorge Rivero
Alberto Rojas "El caballo"
Rafael Inclán
Roberto Ibañez
Leopoldo García Peláez Benítez Polo Polo
Antonio Raxel
Raúl Padilla "El Choforo"
Miguel M. Delgado
Luis de Alba
René Ruíz "Tun Tun"
Pedro Weber "Chattanooga"
César Bono
Eduardo de la Peña "Lalo el Mimo"
Rossy Mendoza
Alfonso Zayas

See also
Commedia sexy all'italiana
Sex comedy
Cinema of Mexico
Mexican LGBT+ cinema


== References ==