New generation films is a Malayalam film movement developed in the early 2010s, characterized by fresh and unusual themes and new narrative techniques. Films of the new wave differ from conventional themes of the past two decades and introduced several new trends and techniques to the Malayalam film industry. While the new generation formats and styles are deeply influenced by global trends, their thematics are firmly rooted in Malayalee life and mindscapes.The new generation also helped to revive the Malayalam film industry in the early 2020s when the industry was hit with the effects of COVID-19 pandemic.

Beginning
The rise of new generation movement can be traced back to the films such as Traffic (2011), City of God (2011), Salt N' Pepper (2011) and Chaappa Kurishu (2011), which helped define the movement. A few young writers and directors successfully brought new trends in fields such as acting, cinematography, editing, scripting and music; and the industry witnessed the emergence of new talent. In the beginning, most of the new wave films were modestly budgeted, thus supporting experiments by new directors, between Rs. 2 - 3 Crores (compared to the average Malayalam commercial film budget of Rs. 6 - 8 Crores) and have more than recovered their investment.Unlike the general trend in the Malayalam films, most of the new directors were young. Director Aashiq Abu, one of the most talked-about new generation film-makers in Malayalam, introduced several new wave films and technicians. Actor-producer Jayasurya who had debuted into the industry in 2002, had begun creating his own signature in the new-wave of cinema through phenomenal acting performances in films such as Beautiful and Trivandrum Lodge. Jayasurya had also broke the image barrier of performing in lead roles for a mainstream actor or star, by essaying several character roles and antagonist roles all which were critically acclaimed. Actor-writer Anoop Menon was another emerging personality in the beginning of New Generation Era.

Characteristics of films
Erosion of the so-called "superstar" system in popular Malayalam films coincided with rise of the new wave where screenplay got rooted-to-reality, closer-to-life and lead characters became ordinary men and women. Influx of new actors, the absence of superstars, rise of metro-centric/urban and middle-class themes and different story-lines were also noted in the wave. While formats and styles of the new directors are deeply influenced by the global trends, their thematics were firmly rooted in Malayali life and mind-scape. A recurrent trope in these new narratives is accidents, coincidences, casual encounters and chance meetings that set in motion an unexpected chain of events affecting the lives of the characters drifting in the urban flotsam. The frequent use of Malayalam influenced by English is also noted in the films.  The use of latest technology has added speed to the process of change in the industry. More advanced technology and innovative techniques are being experimented and the industry has become more open to trying out new ideas.
Until the beginning of new wave, most Malayalam films had rural themes portraying the "essential goodness" and "unspoilt beauty" of villages. The focus of the films also shifted from the conventional masculine, handsome, virtuous and invincible hero to more humane characters. Another notable feature is that stories shifted to depict more non-male characters as lead. Movies featuring gender minorities and homosexual leads is another definitive characteristic of this era of Malayalam cinema. The depiction of women has also changed in the New Wave films beyond recognition. The leading ladies often flirt openly, drink in public, and make lewd comments. A number of female-oriented films like 22 Female Kottayam, Rani Padmini, Uyare, The Great Indian Kitchen were also the part of the new wave.

Impact on superstardom
The new wave soon ignited a debate about the era of superstars coming to an end with Malayalam cinema witnessing a radical change. In the 1980s, stars mattered, though not as much as in the 1990s and 2000s, when Malayalam cinema was practically dictated by the then superstars of the industry. The stranglehold of superstars that was stifling any new experimentation, complemented by the autocratic control of Malayalam film industry organisations over all areas of the industry was seen as pushing the industry to the wall. Unlike Mohanlal, Mammootty has done more films with directors of new wave movement, mostly being the directors' debut movie.

Notable personalities
Actors
Aishwarya Lekshmi
Aju Varghese
Alencier Ley Lopez
Anil Nedumangad
Anna Ben
Ann Augustine
Anoop Menon
Antony Varghese
Anumol
Anusree
Aparna Balamurali
Aparna Gopinath
Arjun Ashokan
Asif Ali
Balu Varghese
Basil Joseph
Binu Pappu
Chemban Vinod Jose
Darshana Rajendran
Dhyan Sreenivasan
Dileesh Pothan
Dulquer Salmaan
Fahadh Faasil
Farhaan Faasil
Grace Antony
Honey Rose
Jacob Gregory
Jinu Joseph
Johny Antony
Joju George
Kalidas Jayaram
Kalyani Priyadarshan
Madonna Sebastian
Mathew Thomas
Murali Gopy
Muthumani
Mythili
Naslen K. Gafoor
Nazriya Nazim
Neeraj Madhav
Nikhila Vimal
Nimisha Sajayan
Nithya Menen
Nivin Pauly
Nyla Usha
Parvathy Thiruvothu
Pranav Mohanlal
Rajisha Vijayan
Remya Nambeesan
Renji Panicker
Rima Kallingal
Roshan Mathew
Sai Pallavi
Sajitha Madathil
Samyuktha Menon
Sasi Kalinga
Shane Nigam
Sharaf U Dheen
Shine Tom Chacko
Soubin Shahir
Sreenath Bhasi
Srindaa
Sudev Nair
Sunil Sukhada
Sunny Wayne
Swathi Reddy
Tovino Thomas
Unnimaya Prasad
Unni Mukundan
Vijay Babu
Vinayakan
Vinay Forrt
Vineeth SreenivasanActors like Thilakan, Nedumudi Venu, Prithviraj Sukumaran, Jayasurya, Kunchacko Boban, Indrajith Sukumaran, Biju Menon, Indrans, Pratap Pothen, Suraj Venjarammood, Harisree Asokan, Kunchan, Lal, Saiju Kurup, Jaffar Idukki, Baburaj, Lena etc. who began their career before the new wave were also noted for their hard-hitting performances in the new generation films.

Directors
Aashiq Abu
Abrid Shine
Alphonse Puthren
Amal Neerad
Anjali Menon
Anwar Rasheed
Arun Kumar Aravind
Ashraf Hamza
Basil Joseph
Dijo Jose Antony
Dileesh Pothan
Don Palathara
Geetu Mohandas
Gireesh A. D
Jeo Baby
Johnpaul George
Joy Mathew
Khalid Rahman
Lal Jr.
Lijin Jose
Lijo Jose Pellissery
Madhav Ramdas
Madhu C. Narayanan
Madhupal
Mahesh Narayanan
Manu Ashokan
Midhun Manuel Thomas
Muhammad Musthafa
Muhsin Parari
Rajeev Ravi
Rajesh Pillai
Ratheesh Balakrishnan Poduval
Rohith V. S
Rojin thomas
Roopesh Peethambaran
Sameer Thahir
Sidharth Bharathan
Shyju Khalid
Soubin Shahir
Tinu Pappachan
V. K. Prakash
Vinay Govind
Vineeth Sreenivasan
Vipin Vijay
Salim Ahmed
Zakariya MohammedScreenwriters like Syam Pushkaran, Dileesh Nair, Bobby–Sanjay, Unni R., Santhosh Echikkanam, Anjali Menon, PS Rafeeque, P. F. Mathews, S. Hareesh, Murali Gopy, Gopan Chidambaram, P. Balachandran, Shahi Kabir, Muhsin Parari; Cinematographers such as Shyju Khalid, Sameer Thahir, Madhu Neelakandan, Abinandhan Ramanujam, Jomon T. John, Renadive, Little Swayamp, Anend C. Chandran, Pappu, Shehnad Jalal, Vinod illampally; Musical Artists Bijibal, Rex Vijayan, Jakes Bejoy, Prashant Pillai, Sushin Shyam, Gopi Sundar, Rahul Raj, Shaan Rahman, Rajesh Murugesan, Shahabaz Aman, Vishnu Vijay, Justin Varghese; Editors like Vivek Harshan, B. Ajithkumar, Saiju Sreedharan, Mahesh Narayanan, Praveen Prabhakar, Manoj, Noufal Abdullah, Deepu Joseph etc. were also made significant contributions to New Wave Films.

Films widely regarded as new generation films
The following are some of the films widely considered as new generation Malayalam films: 

Traffic – a film that was directed by Rajesh Pillai. The success of the film gave New Generation Cinema the green signal.
100 Days of Love
1 by Two
1956, Central Travancore
1983
22 Female Kottayam
5 Sundarikal
7th Day
 Aanum Pennum
Aarkkariyam
Action Hero Biju
Ajagajantharam
Akam
Amen
Anarkali
Android Kunjappan Version 5.25
Annayum Rasoolum
Anugraheethan Antony
Anuraga Karikkin Vellam
Apothecary
Ayalum Njanum Thammil
Ayyappanum Koshiyum
Bachelor Party
Bangalore Days
Beautiful
Bheemante Vazhi
Bheeshma Parvam
Bhoothakaalam
C U Soon
Chappa Kurishu
Charlie
Chirakodinja Kinavukal
Churuli
City of God
Da Thadiya
Dear Friend
Double Barrel
Ee Adutha Kaalathu
Ee.Ma.Yau
Ezra
Friday
Godha (film)
Guppy
Helen
Honey Bee
Hotel California
Hridayam
Iblis
Idukki Gold
Iyobinte Pusthakam
Jallikattu
Jan.E.Man
Jana Gana Mana
Jo and Jo
John Luther (film)
Joji
Joseph
Kala
Kammatti Paadam
Kanakam Kaamini Kalaham
Kappela
Kili Poyi
Kumbalangi Nights
Kunjiramayanam
Kuttavum Shikshayum
Lukka Chuppi
Mahaveeryar
Maheshinte Prathikaaram
Malayankunju
Mayanadi
Mili
Minnal Murali
Moothon
Mumbai Police
Munnariyippu
Naaradan
Nayattu
Nee Ko Njaa Cha
Neelakasham Pachakadal Chuvanna Bhoomi
Neram
Nidra
Njan Steve Lopez
Nna Thaan Case Kodu
North 24 Kaatham
Ohm Shanthi Oshaana
Operation Java
Oru Vadakkan Selfie
Pada
Parava
Philips and the Monkey Pen
Premam
Puzhu
Rani Padmini
Salt N' Pepper
Santhoshathinte Onnam Rahasyam
Savam
Second Show
Sudani From Nigeria
Super Sharanya
Swathanthryam Ardharathriyil
Take Off
Tamaar Padaar
Thallumaala
Thamaasha
Thanneer Mathan Dinangal
Thattathin Marayathu
Thinkalazhcha Nishchayam
The Great Indian Kitchen
Theevram
Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum
Trance
Trivandrum Lodge
Unda
Ustad Hotel
Uyare
Valiyaperunnal
Varathan
Vedivazhipadu
Vettah
Virus

General response and criticisms
As per critics, the new wave of activity in Malayalam cinema is reminiscent of the 1980s, regarded as the golden age of Malayalam cinema, when mainstream films bridged the gap between arthouse and commercial movies, led by a team of talented writers and directors. In the 1980s, Malayalam films witnessed some positive changes through directors like Padmarajan and Bharathan, who made path-breaking films. These films too broke the norms which were considered the prerequisite for a commercial entertainer, and traversed a new path between popular and parallel cinema.There is a general consensus that the New-Gen movies draw a lot of inspiration from other film industries. They depict lives of people living in 21st century Kerala through a very realistic lens, it's often said that most of its success is due to the freshness these narratives possess in comparison to traditional Malayalam movies.. New-Gen Malayalam movies tend to feature more nucleus families and urban lifestyle, rather than the depiction of traditional joint families from villages. This and the adult themes present in a lot of movies has gained the New-Gen movies the criticism that they're primary targeted towards young people.
The new wave films are criticized for explicit language and provocative themes, often "under the guise of bold or modern". Malayalam actor Jayaram has talked about his disinterest towards the new generation films publicly, he has heard to be saying the new wave films lacks its appeal towards a family environment as the inappropriateness of mannerisms in certain films, beyond a PG-13 is very awkward to someone who expects to watch a family film such as most of the conventional Malayalam movies were, which did not need a specific rating.The New generation received criticism from some conventional film-makers. They accused that plagiarized versions of foreign films are being presented under the guise of New Wave experiments. While admirers of the New Wave of Malayalam films call it the "Jasmine revolution", critics refer it as the "multiplex revolution". "Some films that are fresh in thought and execution have clicked at the box office," says veteran director Sibi Malayil. "But I am against referring to them as New Wave Cinema. Changes were always there in Malayalam films. But most of these so-called new-generation movies revolve around the themes that deal with life in a metro city. These films are getting a good response in tier-I cities only".


== References ==