The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to natural science:
Natural science – a major branch of science that tries to explain, and predict, nature's phenomena based on empirical evidence. In natural science, hypothesis must be verified scientifically to be regarded as scientific theory.  Validity, accuracy, and social mechanisms ensuring quality control, such as peer review and repeatability of findings, are amongst the criteria and methods used for this purpose. Natural science can be broken into 2 main branches: life science, and physical science. Each of these branches, and all of their sub-branches, are referred to as natural sciences.

Overview
Natural science can be described as all of the following:

Branch of science – systematic enterprise that builds and organizes knowledge in the form of testable explanations and predictions about the universe.
Major category of academic disciplines – an academic discipline is focused study in one academic field or profession. A discipline incorporates expertise, people, projects, communities, challenges, studies, inquiry, and research areas that are strongly associated with academic areas of study or areas of professional practice. For example, the branches of science are commonly referred to as the scientific disciplines. For instance, Gravitation is strongly associated with the discipline of physics, and is considered to be part of that disciplinary knowledge.

Branches of natural science
Physical science
Physical science – branch of natural science that studies non-living systems, in contrast to the biological sciences. It in turn has many branches, each referred to as a "physical science", together called the "physical sciences". However, the term "physical" creates an unintended, somewhat arbitrary distinction, since many branches of physical science also study biological phenomena (organic chemistry, for example).

Astronomy
Astronomy – studies the universe beyond Earth, including its formation and development, and the evolution, physics, chemistry, meteorology, and motion of celestial objects (such as galaxies, planets, etc.) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as the cosmic background radiation).
Astrobiology – study of evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe—also known as exobiology, exopaleontology, and bioastronomy
Astrodynamics – application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to the practical problems concerning the motion of rockets and other spacecraft.
Astrophysics – study of the physical aspects of celestial objects.
Astrometry – branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestially  bodies.
Cosmology – discipline that deals with the nature of the Universe as a whole.
Extragalactic astronomy – branch of astronomy concerned with objects outside our own Milky Way Galaxy
Galactic astronomy – study of our own Milky Way galaxy and all its contents.
Physical cosmology – study of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and is concerned with fundamental questions about its formation and evolution.
Planetary science – scientific study of planets (including Earth), moons, and planetary systems, in particular those of the Solar System and the processes that form them.
Stellar astronomy – natural science that deals with the study of celestial objects (such as stars, planets, comets, nebulae, star clusters and galaxies) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as cosmic background radiation)

Physics
Physics – physical science that studies matter and its motion through space-time, and related concepts such as energy and force
Acoustics – study of mechanical waves in solids, liquids, and gases (such as vibration and sound)
Agrophysics – study of physics applied to agroecosystems
Soil physics – study of soil physical properties and processes.
Atmospheric physics – study of the application of physics to the atmosphere
Atomic, molecular, and optical physics – study of how matter and light interact
Biophysics – study of physical processes relating to biology
Medical physics – application of physics concepts, theories and methods to medicine.
Neurophysics – branch of biophysics dealing with the nervous system.
Chemical physics – branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.
Computational physics – study and implementation of numerical algorithms to solve problems in physics for which a quantitative theory already exists.
Condensed matter physics – study of the physical properties of condensed phases of matter.
Cryogenics – cryogenics is the study of the production of very low temperature (below −150 °C, −238 °F or 123K) and the behavior of materials at those temperatures.
Dynamics – study of the causes of motion and changes in motion
Econophysics – interdisciplinary research field, applying theories and methods originally developed by physicists in order to solve problems in economics
Electromagnetism – branch of science concerned with the forces that occur between electrically charged particles.
Geophysics – the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods
Materials physics – use of physics to describe materials in many different ways such as force, heat, light and mechanics.
Mathematical physics – application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories.
Mechanics – branch of physics concerned with the behavior of physical bodies when subjected to forces or displacements, and the subsequent effects of the bodies on their environment.
Biomechanics – study of the structure and function of biological systems such as humans, animals, plants, organs, and cells by means of the methods of mechanics.
Classical mechanics – one of the two major sub-fields of mechanics, which is concerned with the set of physical laws describing the motion of bodies under the action of a system of forces.
Continuum mechanics – branch of mechanics that deals with the analysis of the kinematics and the mechanical behavior of materials modeled as a continuous mass rather than as discrete particles.
Fluid mechanics – study of fluids and the forces on them.
Quantum mechanics – branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.
Thermodynamics – branch of physical science concerned with heat and its relation to other forms of energy and work.
Nuclear physics – field of physics that studies the building blocks and interactions of atomic nuclei.
Optics – branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.
Particle physics – branch of physics that studies the existence and interactions of particles that are the constituents of what is usually referred to as matter or radiation.
Psychophysics – quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.
Plasma physics – state of matter similar to gas in which a certain portion of the particles are ionized.
Polymer physics – field of physics that studies polymers, their fluctuations, mechanical properties, as well as the kinetics of reactions involving degradation and polymerisation of polymers and monomers respectively.
Quantum physics – branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.
Relativity – branch of physics dealing with the mechanics of objects that approach the speed of light.
Statics – branch of mechanics concerned with the analysis of loads (force, torque/moment) on physical systems in static equilibrium, that is, in a state where the relative positions of subsystems do not vary over time, or where components and structures are at a constant velocity.
Solid state physics – study of rigid matter, or solids, through methods such as quantum mechanics, crystallography, electromagnetism, and metallurgy.
Vehicle dynamics – dynamics of vehicles, here assumed to be ground vehicles.

Chemistry
Chemistry – physical science of atomic matter (matter that is composed of chemical elements), especially its chemical reactions, but also including its properties, structure, composition, behavior, and changes as they relate the chemical reactions
Analytical chemistry – study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.
Astrochemistry – study of the abundance and reactions of chemical elements and molecules in the universe, and their interaction with radiation.
Cosmochemistry – study of the chemical composition of matter in the universe and the processes that led to those compositions
Atmospheric chemistry – branch of atmospheric science in which the chemistry of the Earth's atmosphere and that of other planets is studied. It is a multidisciplinary field of research and draws on environmental chemistry, physics, meteorology, computer modeling, oceanography, geology and volcanology and other disciplines
Biochemistry – study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter. Biochemistry governs all living organisms and living processes.
Agrochemistry – study of both chemistry and biochemistry which are important in agricultural production, the processing of raw products into foods and beverages, and in environmental monitoring and remediation.
Bioinorganic chemistry – examines the role of metals in biology.
Bioorganic chemistry – rapidly growing scientific discipline that combines organic chemistry and biochemistry.
Biophysical chemistry –  new branch of chemistry that covers a broad spectrum of research activities involving biological systems.
Environmental chemistry – scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.
Immunochemistry – branch of chemistry that involves the study of the reactions and components on the immune system.
Medicinal chemistry – discipline at the intersection of chemistry, especially synthetic organic chemistry, and pharmacology and various other biological specialties, where they are involved with design, chemical synthesis and development for market of pharmaceutical agents (drugs).
Pharmacology – branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.
Natural product chemistry – chemical compound or substance produced by a living organism – found in nature that usually has a pharmacological or biological activity for use in pharmaceutical drug discovery and drug design.
Neurochemistry – specific study of neurochemicals, which include neurotransmitters and other molecules such as neuro-active drugs that influence neuron function.
Computational chemistry – branch of chemistry that uses principles of computer science to assist in solving chemical problems.
Chemo-informatics – use of computer and informational techniques, applied to a range of problems in the field of chemistry.
Molecular mechanics – uses Newtonian mechanics to model molecular systems.
Flavor chemistry – someone who uses chemistry to engineer artificial and natural flavors.
Flow chemistry – chemical reaction is run in a continuously flowing stream rather than in batch production.
Geochemistry – study of the mechanisms behind major geological systems using chemistry
Aqueous geochemistry – study of the role of various elements in watersheds, including copper, sulfur, mercury, and how elemental fluxes are exchanged through atmospheric-terrestrial-aquatic interactions
Isotope geochemistry – study of the relative and absolute concentrations of the elements and their isotopes using chemistry and geology
Ocean chemistry – studies the chemistry of marine environments including the influences of different variables.
Organic geochemistry – study of the impacts and processes that organisms have had on Earth
Regional, environmental and exploration geochemistry – study of the spatial variation in the chemical composition of materials at the surface of the Earth
Inorganic chemistry – branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.
Nuclear chemistry – subfield of chemistry dealing with radioactivity, nuclear processes and nuclear properties.
Radiochemistry – chemistry of radioactive materials, where radioactive isotopes of elements are used to study the properties and chemical reactions of non-radioactive isotopes (often within radiochemistry the absence of radioactivity leads to a substance being described as being inactive as the isotopes are stable).
Organic chemistry – study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.
Petrochemistry – branch of chemistry that studies the transformation of crude oil (petroleum) and natural gas into useful products or raw materials.
Organometallic chemistry – study of chemical compounds containing bonds between carbon and a metal.
Photochemistry – study of chemical reactions that proceed with the absorption of light by atoms or molecules..
Physical chemistry – study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.
Chemical kinetics –  the study of rates of chemical processes.
Chemical thermodynamics – study of the interrelation of heat and work with chemical reactions or with physical changes of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics.
Electrochemistry – branch of chemistry that studies chemical reactions which take place in a solution at the interface of an electron conductor (a metal or a semiconductor) and an ionic conductor (the electrolyte), and which involve electron transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte or species in solution.
Femtochemistry – Femtochemistry is the science that studies chemical reactions on extremely short timescales, approximately 10−15 seconds (one femtosecond, hence the name).
Mathematical chemistry – area of research engaged in novel applications of mathematics to chemistry; it concerns itself principally with the mathematical modeling of chemical phenomena.
Mechanochemistry – coupling of the mechanical and the chemical phenomena on a molecular scale and includes mechanical breakage, chemical behaviour of mechanically stressed solids (e.g., stress-corrosion cracking), tribology, polymer degradation under shear, cavitation-related phenomena (e.g., sonochemistry and sonoluminescence), shock wave chemistry and physics, and even the burgeoning field of molecular machines.
Physical organic chemistry – study of the interrelationships between structure and reactivity in organic molecules.
Quantum chemistry – branch of chemistry whose primary focus is the application of quantum mechanics in physical models and experiments of chemical systems.
Sonochemistry – study of the effect of sonic waves and wave properties on chemical systems.
Stereochemistry – study of the relative spatial arrangement of atoms within molecules.
Supramolecular chemistry – area of chemistry beyond the molecules and focuses on the chemical systems made up of a discrete number of assembled molecular subunits or components.
Thermochemistry – study of the energy and heat associated with chemical reactions and/or physical transformations.
Phytochemistry – strict sense of the word the study of phytochemicals.
Polymer chemistry – multidisciplinary science that deals with the chemical synthesis and chemical properties of polymers or macromolecules.
Solid-state chemistry – study of the synthesis, structure, and properties of solid phase materials, particularly, but not necessarily exclusively of, non-molecular solids
Multidisciplinary fields involving chemistry
Chemical biology – scientific discipline spanning the fields of chemistry and biology that involves the application of chemical techniques and tools, often compounds produced through synthetic chemistry, to the study and manipulation of biological systems.
Chemical engineering – branch of engineering that deals with physical science (e.g., chemistry and physics), and life sciences (e.g., biology, microbiology and biochemistry) with mathematics and economics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms.
Chemical oceanography – study of the behavior of the chemical elements within the Earth's oceans.
Chemical physics – branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.
Materials science – interdisciplinary field applying the properties of matter to various areas of science and engineering.
Nanotechnology – study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale
Oenology – science and study of all aspects of wine and winemaking except vine-growing and grape-harvesting, which is a subfield called viticulture.
Spectroscopy – study of the interaction between matter and radiated energy
Surface science – Surface science is the study of physical and chemical phenomena that occur at the interface of two phases, including solid–liquid interfaces, solid–gas interfaces, solid–vacuum interfaces, and liquid–gas interfaces.

Earth science
Earth science – all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth. Earth science, and all of its branches, are branches of physical science.
Atmospheric sciences –  umbrella term for the study of the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems.
Biogeography – study of the distribution of species (biology), organisms, and ecosystems in geographic space and through geological time.
Cartography – study and practice of making maps or globes.
Climatology – study of climate, scientifically defined as weather conditions averaged over a period of time
Coastal geography – study of the dynamic interface between the ocean and the land, incorporating both the physical geography (i.e. coastal geomorphology, geology and oceanography) and the human geography (sociology and history) of the coast.
Environmental science – an integrated, quantitative, and interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental systems.
Ecology – scientific study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms and how the distribution and abundance are affected by interactions between the organisms and their environment.
Freshwater biology – scientific biological study of freshwater ecosystems and is a branch of Limnology
Marine biology – scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water
Parasitology – Parasitology is the study of parasites, their hosts, and the relationship between them.
Population dynamics – Population dynamics is the branch of life sciences that studies short-term and long-term changes in the size and age composition of populations, and the biological and environmental processes influencing those changes.
Environmental chemistry – Environmental chemistry is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.
Environmental soil science – Environmental soil science is the study of the interaction of humans with the pedosphere as well as critical aspects of the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere.
Environmental geology – Environmental geology, like hydrogeology, is an applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems.
Toxicology – branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.
Geodesy – scientific discipline that deals with the measurement and representation of the Earth, including its gravitational field, in a three-dimensional time-varying space
Geography – science that studies the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth
Geoinformatics – science and the technology which develops and uses information science infrastructure to address the problems of geography, geosciences and related branches of engineering.
Geology – study of the Earth, with the general exclusion of present-day life, flow within the ocean, and the atmosphere.
Planetary geology – planetary science discipline concerned with the geology of the celestial bodies such as the planets and their moons, asteroids, comets, and meteorites.
Geomorphology – scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them
Geostatistics – branch of statistics focusing on spatial or spatiotemporal datasets
Geophysics – physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods.
Glaciology – study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.
Hydrology – study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.
Hydrogeology – area of geology that deals with the distribution and movement of groundwater in the soil and rocks of the Earth's crust (commonly in aquifers).
Mineralogy – study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.
Meteorology – interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere which explains and forecasts weather events.
Oceanography – branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
Paleoclimatology – study of changes in climate taken on the scale of the entire history of Earth
Paleontology – study of prehistoric life
Petrology – branch of geology that studies the origin, composition, distribution and structure of rocks.
Limnology – study of inland waters
Seismology – scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies
Soil science – study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the earth including soil formation, classification and mapping; physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils.
Topography – study of surface shape and features of the Earth and other observable astronomical objects including planets, moons, and asteroids.
Volcanology – study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.

Life science
Biology
Biology – study of living organisms.
Aerobiology – study of airborne organic particles
Agriculture – study of producing crops from the land, with an emphasis on practical applications
Anatomy – study of form and function, in plants, animals, and other organisms, or specifically in humans
Human anatomy – scientific study of the morphology of the adult human.
Biochemistry – study of the chemical reactions required for life to exist and function, usually a focus on the cellular level
Bioengineering – study of biology through the means of engineering with an emphasis on applied knowledge and especially related to biotechnology
Biogeography – study of the distribution of species spatially and temporally
Bioinformatics – use of information technology and statistics for the study, collection, and storage of genomic and other biological data
Biomathematics or mathematical biology – quantitative or mathematical study of biological processes, with an emphasis on modeling
Biomechanics – often considered a branch of medicine, the study of the mechanics of living beings, with an emphasis on applied use through prosthetics or orthotics
Biomedical research – study of the human body in health and disease
Biophysics – study of biological processes through physics, by applying the theories and methods traditionally used in the physical sciences
Biotechnology – new and sometimes controversial branch of biology that studies the manipulation of living matter, including genetic modification and synthetic biology
Botany – study of plants
Cell biology – study of the cell as a complete unit, and the molecular and chemical interactions that occur within a living cell
Conservation biology – study of the preservation, protection, or restoration of the natural environment, natural ecosystems, vegetation, and wildlife
Chronobiology – field of biology that examines periodic (cyclic) phenomena in living organisms and their adaptation to solar- and lunar-related rhythms.
Cryobiology – study of the effects of lower than normally preferred temperatures on living beings.
Developmental biology – study of the processes through which an organism forms, from zygote to full structure
Embryology – study of the development of embryo (from fecundation to birth). See also topobiology.
Gerontology – study of aging processes.
Ecology – study of the interactions of living organisms with one another and with the non-living elements of their environment
Environmental biology – study of the natural world, as a whole or in a particular area, especially as affected by human activity
Epidemiology – major component of public health research, studying factors affecting the health of populations
Evolution – any change across successive generations in the heritable characteristics of biological populations.
Evolutionary biology – study of the origin and descent of species over time
Evolutionary developmental biology – field of biology that compares the developmental processes of different organisms to determine the ancestral relationship between them, and to discover how developmental processes evolved.
Paleobiology – discipline which combines the methods and findings of the natural science biology with the methods and findings of the earth science paleontology.
Paleontology – study of fossils and sometimes geographic evidence of prehistoric life
Genetics – study of genes and heredity
Genomics – discipline in genetics concerned with the study of the genomes of organisms.
Proteomics – large-scale study of proteins, particularly their structures and functions
Population genetics – study of changes in gene frequencies in
Histology – study of cells and tissues, a microscopic branch of anatomy
Integrative biology – study of whole organisms
Limnology – study of inland waters
Marine biology – study of ocean ecosystems, plants, animals, and other living beings
Microbiology – study of microscopic organisms (microorganisms) and their interactions with other living things
Bacteriology – study of bacteria.
Virology – study of viruses and some other virus-like agents
Molecular biology – study of biology and biological functions at the molecular level, some cross over with biochemistry
Structural biology – branch of molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics concerned with the molecular structure of biological macromolecules
Morphology – In biology, morphology is a branch of bioscience dealing with the study of the form and structure of organisms and their specific structural features.
Mycology – study of fungi
Oceanography – study of the ocean, including ocean life, environment, geography, weather, and other aspects influencing the ocean
Oncology – study of cancer processes, including virus or mutation oncogenesis, angiogenesis and tissues remoldings
Population biology – study of groups of conspecific organisms, including
Population ecology – study of how population dynamics and extinction
Population genetics – study of changes in gene frequencies in populations of organisms
Pathobiology or pathology – study of diseases, and the causes, processes, nature, and development of disease
Parasitology – study of parasites and parasitism
Pharmacology – study and practical application of preparation, use, and effects of drugs and synthetic medicines
Physiology – study of the functioning of living organisms and the organs and parts of living organisms
Immunology – Immunology is the study of all aspects of the immune system in all organisms
Kinesiology – Kinesiology, also known as human kinetics, is the scientific study of human movement
Neurobiology – study of the nervous system, including anatomy, physiology and pathology
Neuroscience – interdisciplinary science that studies the nervous system
Histology –
Phytopathology – study of plant diseases (also called plant pathology)
Psychobiology – study of the biological bases of psychology
Sociobiology – study of the biological bases of sociology
Systematics – study of the diversification of living forms, both past and present, and the relationships among living things through time
Cladistics – method of classifying species of organisms into groups called clades, which consist of an ancestor organism and all its descendants (and nothing else)
Phylogeny – study of evolutionary relation among groups of organisms (e.g. species, populations), which is discovered through molecular sequencing data and morphological data matrices
Taxonomy – science of identifying and naming species, and arranging them into a classification.
Zoology – study of animals, including classification, physiology, development, and behavior
Arachnology – scientific study of spiders and related animals such as scorpions, pseudoscorpions, harvestmen, collectively called arachnids.
Acarology – study of the taxon of arachnids that contains mites and ticks
Entomology – study of insects
Myrmecology – scientific study of ants, a branch of entomology
Coleopterology – study of beetles
Lepidopterology – study of a large order of insects that includes moths and butterflies (called lepidopterans)
Ethology – study of animal behavior
Helminthology – study of worms, especially parasitic worms
Herpetology – study of reptiles and amphibians
Ichthyology – study of fish
Malacology – branch of invertebrate zoology which deals with the study of the Mollusca (mollusks or molluscs), the second-largest phylum of animals in terms of described species after the arthropods.
Mammalogy – study of mammals
Cetology – branch of marine mammal science that studies the approximately eighty species of whales, dolphins, and porpoise in the scientific order Cetacea.
Physical anthropology – studies the physical development of the human species.
Nematology – scientific discipline concerned with the study of nematodes, or roundworms
Ornithology – study of birds

History of natural science
History of natural science

Natural philosophy

History of the branches of natural science
History of physical science – history of the branch of natural science that studies non-living systems, in contrast to the biological sciences. It in turn has many branches, each referred to as a "physical science", together called the "physical sciences". However, the term "physical" creates an unintended, somewhat arbitrary distinction, since many branches of physical science also study biological phenomena (organic chemistry, for example).
History of physics – history of the physical science that studies matter and its motion through space-time, and related concepts such as energy and force
History of acoustics – history of the study of mechanical waves in solids, liquids, and gases (such as vibration and sound)
History of agrophysics – history of the study of physics applied to agroecosystems
History of soil physics – history of the study of soil physical properties and processes.
History of astrophysics – history of the study of the physical aspects of celestial objects
History of astronomy – history of the studies the universe beyond Earth, including its formation and development, and the evolution, physics, chemistry, meteorology, and motion of celestial objects (such as galaxies, planets, etc.) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as the cosmic background radiation).
History of astrodynamics – history of the application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to the practical problems concerning the motion of rockets and other spacecraft.
History of astrometry – history of the branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestial bodies.
History of cosmology – history of the discipline that deals with the nature of the Universe as a whole.
History of extragalactic astronomy – history of the branch of astronomy concerned with objects outside our own Milky Way Galaxy
History of galactic astronomy – history of the study of our own Milky Way galaxy and all its contents.
History of physical cosmology – history of the study of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and is concerned with fundamental questions about its formation and evolution.
History of planetary science – history of the scientific study of planets (including Earth), moons, and planetary systems, in particular those of the Solar System and the processes that form them.
History of stellar astronomy – history of the natural science that deals with the study of celestial objects (such as stars, planets, comets, nebulae, star clusters and galaxies) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as cosmic background radiation)
History of atmospheric physics – history of the study of the application of physics to the atmosphere
History of atomic, molecular, and optical physics – history of the study of how matter and light interact
History of biophysics – history of the study of physical processes relating to biology
History of medical physics – history of the application of physics concepts, theories and methods to medicine.
History of neurophysics – history of the branch of biophysics dealing with the nervous system.
History of chemical physics – history of the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.
History of computational physics – history of the study and implementation of numerical algorithms to solve problems in physics for which a quantitative theory already exists.
History of condensed matter physics – history of the study of the physical properties of condensed phases of matter.
History of cryogenics – history of the cryogenics is the study of the production of very low temperature (below −150 °C, −238 °F or 123K) and the behavior of materials at those temperatures.
History of dynamics – history of the study of the causes of motion and changes in motion
History of econophysics – history of the interdisciplinary research field, applying theories and methods originally developed by physicists in order to solve problems in economics
History of electromagnetism – history of the branch of science concerned with the forces that occur between electrically charged particles.
History of geophysics – history of the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods
History of materials physics – history of the use of physics to describe materials in many different ways such as force, heat, light and mechanics.
History of mathematical physics – history of the application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories.
History of mechanics – history of the branch of physics concerned with the behavior of physical bodies when subjected to forces or displacements, and the subsequent effects of the bodies on their environment.
History of biomechanics – history of the study of the structure and function of biological systems such as humans, animals, plants, organs, and cells by means of the methods of mechanics.
History of classical mechanics – history of the one of the two major sub-fields of mechanics, which is concerned with the set of physical laws describing the motion of bodies under the action of a system of forces.
History of continuum mechanics – history of the branch of mechanics that deals with the analysis of the kinematics and the mechanical behavior of materials modeled as a continuous mass rather than as discrete particles.
History of fluid mechanics – history of the study of fluids and the forces on them.
History of quantum mechanics – history of the branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.
History of thermodynamics – history of the branch of physical science concerned with heat and its relation to other forms of energy and work.
History of nuclear physics – history of the field of physics that studies the building blocks and interactions of atomic nuclei.
History of optics – history of the branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.
History of particle physics – history of the branch of physics that studies the existence and interactions of particles that are the constituents of what is usually referred to as matter or radiation.
History of psychophysics – history of the quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.
History of plasma physics – history of the state of matter similar to gas in which a certain portion of the particles are ionized.
History of polymer physics – history of the field of physics that studies polymers, their fluctuations, mechanical properties, as well as the kinetics of reactions involving degradation and polymerisation of polymers and monomers respectively.
History of quantum physics – history of the branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.
Relativity –
History of statics – history of the branch of mechanics concerned with the analysis of loads (force, torque/moment) on physical systems in static equilibrium, that is, in a state where the relative positions of subsystems do not vary over time, or where components and structures are at a constant velocity.
History of solid state physics – history of the study of rigid matter, or solids, through methods such as quantum mechanics, crystallography, electromagnetism, and metallurgy.
History of vehicle dynamics – history of the dynamics of vehicles, here assumed to be ground vehicles.
History of chemistry – history of the physical science of atomic matter (matter that is composed of chemical elements), especially its chemical reactions, but also including its properties, structure, composition, behavior, and changes as they relate the chemical reactions
History of analytical chemistry – history of the study of the separation, identification, and quantification of the chemical components of natural and artificial materials.
History of astrochemistry – history of the study of the abundance and reactions of chemical elements and molecules in the universe, and their interaction with radiation.
History of cosmochemistry – history of the study of the chemical composition of matter in the universe and the processes that led to those compositions
History of atmospheric chemistry – history of the branch of atmospheric science in which the chemistry of the Earth's atmosphere and that of other planets is studied. It is a multidisciplinary field of research and draws on environmental chemistry, physics, meteorology, computer modeling, oceanography, geology and volcanology and other disciplines
History of biochemistry – history of the study of chemical processes in living organisms, including, but not limited to, living matter. Biochemistry governs all living organisms and living processes.
History of agrochemistry – history of the study of both chemistry and biochemistry which are important in agricultural production, the processing of raw products into foods and beverages, and in environmental monitoring and remediation.
History of bioinorganic chemistry – history of the examines the role of metals in biology.
History of bioorganic chemistry – history of the rapidly growing scientific discipline that combines organic chemistry and biochemistry.
History of biophysical chemistry – history of the  new branch of chemistry that covers a broad spectrum of research activities involving biological systems.
History of environmental chemistry – history of the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.
History of immunochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that involves the study of the reactions and components on the immune system.
History of medicinal chemistry – history of the discipline at the intersection of chemistry, especially synthetic organic chemistry, and pharmacology and various other biological specialties, where they are involved with design, chemical synthesis and development for market of pharmaceutical agents (drugs).
History of pharmacology – history of the branch of medicine and biology concerned with the study of drug action.
History of natural product chemistry – history of the chemical compound or substance produced by a living organism – history of the found in nature that usually has a pharmacological or biological activity for use in pharmaceutical drug discovery and drug design.
History of neurochemistry – history of the specific study of neurochemicals, which include neurotransmitters and other molecules such as neuro-active drugs that influence neuron function.
History of computational chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that uses principles of computer science to assist in solving chemical problems.
History of cheminformatics – history of the use of computer and informational techniques, applied to a range of problems in the field of chemistry.
History of molecular mechanics – history of the uses Newtonian mechanics to model molecular systems.
History of flavor chemistry – history of the someone who uses chemistry to engineer artificial and natural flavors.
History of flow chemistry – history of the chemical reaction is run in a continuously flowing stream rather than in batch production.
History of geochemistry – history of the study of the mechanisms behind major geological systems using chemistry
History of aqueous geochemistry – history of the study of the role of various elements in watersheds, including copper, sulfur, mercury, and how elemental fluxes are exchanged through atmospheric-terrestrial-aquatic interactions
History of isotope geochemistry – history of the study of the relative and absolute concentrations of the elements and their isotopes using chemistry and geology
History of ocean chemistry – history of the studies the chemistry of marine environments including the influences of different variables.
History of organic geochemistry – history of the study of the impacts and processes that organisms have had on Earth
History of regional, environmental and exploration geochemistry – history of the study of the spatial variation in the chemical composition of materials at the surface of the Earth
History of inorganic chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry concerned with the properties and behavior of inorganic compounds.
History of nuclear chemistry – history of the subfield of chemistry dealing with radioactivity, nuclear processes and nuclear properties.
History of radiochemistry – history of the chemistry of radioactive materials, where radioactive isotopes of elements are used to study the properties and chemical reactions of non-radioactive isotopes (often within radiochemistry the absence of radioactivity leads to a substance being described as being inactive as the isotopes are stable).
History of organic chemistry – history of the study of the structure, properties, composition, reactions, and preparation (by synthesis or by other means) of carbon-based compounds, hydrocarbons, and their derivatives.
History of petrochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that studies the transformation of crude oil (petroleum) and natural gas into useful products or raw materials.
History of organometallic chemistry – history of the study of chemical compounds containing bonds between carbon and a metal.
History of photochemistry – history of the study of chemical reactions that proceed with the absorption of light by atoms or molecules..
History of physical chemistry – history of the study of macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate phenomena in chemical systems in terms of physical laws and concepts.
History of chemical kinetics – history of the study of rates of chemical processes.
History of chemical thermodynamics – history of the study of the interrelation of heat and work with chemical reactions or with physical changes of state within the confines of the laws of thermodynamics.
History of electrochemistry – history of the branch of chemistry that studies chemical reactions which take place in a solution at the interface of an electron conductor (a metal or a semiconductor) and an ionic conductor (the electrolyte), and which involve electron transfer between the electrode and the electrolyte or species in solution.
History of Femtochemistry – history of the Femtochemistry is the science that studies chemical reactions on extremely short timescales, approximately 10−15 seconds (one femtosecond, hence the name).
History of mathematical chemistry – history of the area of research engaged in novel applications of mathematics to chemistry; it concerns itself principally with the mathematical modeling of chemical phenomena.
History of mechanochemistry – history of the coupling of the mechanical and the chemical phenomena on a molecular scale and includes mechanical breakage, chemical behaviour of mechanically stressed solids (e.g., stress-corrosion cracking), tribology, polymer degradation under shear, cavitation-related phenomena (e.g., sonochemistry and sonoluminescence), shock wave chemistry and physics, and even the burgeoning field of molecular machines.
History of physical organic chemistry – history of the study of the interrelationships between structure and reactivity in organic molecules.
History of quantum chemistry – history of the branch of chemistry whose primary focus is the application of quantum mechanics in physical models and experiments of chemical systems.
History of sonochemistry – history of the study of the effect of sonic waves and wave properties on chemical systems.
History of stereochemistry – history of the study of the relative spatial arrangement of atoms within molecules.
History of supramolecular chemistry – history of the area of chemistry beyond the molecules and focuses on the chemical systems made up of a discrete number of assembled molecular subunits or components.
History of thermochemistry – history of the study of the energy and heat associated with chemical reactions and/or physical transformations.
History of phytochemistry – history of the strict sense of the word the study of phytochemicals.
History of polymer chemistry – history of the multidisciplinary science that deals with the chemical synthesis and chemical properties of polymers or macromolecules.
History of solid-state chemistry – history of the study of the synthesis, structure, and properties of solid phase materials, particularly, but not necessarily exclusively of, non-molecular solids
Multidisciplinary fields involving chemistry
History of chemical biology – history of the scientific discipline spanning the fields of chemistry and biology that involves the application of chemical techniques and tools, often compounds produced through synthetic chemistry, to the study and manipulation of biological systems.
History of chemical engineering – history of the branch of engineering that deals with physical science (e.g., chemistry and physics), and life sciences (e.g., biology, microbiology and biochemistry) with mathematics and economics, to the process of converting raw materials or chemicals into more useful or valuable forms.
History of chemical oceanography – history of the study of the behavior of the chemical elements within the Earth's oceans.
History of chemical physics – history of the branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.
History of materials science – history of the interdisciplinary field applying the properties of matter to various areas of science and engineering.
History of nanotechnology – history of the study of manipulating matter on an atomic and molecular scale
History of oenology – history of the science and study of all aspects of wine and winemaking except vine-growing and grape-harvesting, which is a subfield called viticulture.
History of spectroscopy – history of the study of the interaction between matter and radiated energy
History of surface science – history of the Surface science is the study of physical and chemical phenomena that occur at the interface of two phases, including solid–liquid interfaces, solid–gas interfaces, solid–vacuum interfaces, and liquid–gas interfaces.
History of earth science – history of the all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth. Earth science, and all of its branches, are branches of physical science.
History of atmospheric sciences – history of the  umbrella term for the study of the atmosphere, its processes, the effects other systems have on the atmosphere, and the effects of the atmosphere on these other systems.
History of biogeography – history of the study of the distribution of species (biology), organisms, and ecosystems in geographic space and through geological time.
History of cartography – history of the study and practice of making maps or globes.
History of climatology – history of the study of climate, scientifically defined as weather conditions averaged over a period of time
History of coastal geography – history of the study of the dynamic interface between the ocean and the land, incorporating both the physical geography (i.e. coastal geomorphology, geology and oceanography) and the human geography (sociology and history) of the coast.
History of environmental science – history of an integrated, quantitative, and interdisciplinary approach to the study of environmental systems.
History of ecology – history of the scientific study of the distribution and abundance of living organisms and how the distribution and abundance are affected by interactions between the organisms and their environment.
History of freshwater biology – history of the scientific biological study of freshwater ecosystems and is a branch of Limnology
History of marine biology – history of the scientific study of organisms in the ocean or other marine or brackish bodies of water
History of parasitology – history of the Parasitology is the study of parasites, their hosts, and the relationship between them.
History of population dynamics – history of the Population dynamics is the branch of life sciences that studies short-term and long-term changes in the size and age composition of populations, and the biological and environmental processes influencing those changes.
History of environmental chemistry – history of the Environmental chemistry is the scientific study of the chemical and biochemical phenomena that occur in natural places.
History of environmental soil science – history of the Environmental soil science is the study of the interaction of humans with the pedosphere as well as critical aspects of the biosphere, the lithosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere.
History of environmental geology – history of the Environmental geology, like hydrogeology, is an applied science concerned with the practical application of the principles of geology in the solving of environmental problems.
History of toxicology – history of the branch of biology, chemistry, and medicine concerned with the study of the adverse effects of chemicals on living organisms.
History of geodesy – history of the scientific discipline that deals with the measurement and representation of the Earth, including its gravitational field, in a three-dimensional time-varying space
History of geography – history of the science that studies the lands, features, inhabitants, and phenomena of Earth
History of geoinformatics – history of the science and the technology which develops and uses information science infrastructure to address the problems of geography, geosciences and related branches of engineering.
History of geology – history of the study of the Earth, with the general exclusion of present-day life, flow within the ocean, and the atmosphere.
History of planetary geology – history of the planetary science discipline concerned with the geology of the celestial bodies such as the planets and their moons, asteroids, comets, and meteorites.
History of geomorphology – history of the scientific study of landforms and the processes that shape them
History of geostatistics – history of the branch of statistics focusing on spatial or spatiotemporal datasets
History of geophysics – history of the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods.
History of glaciology – history of the study of glaciers, or more generally ice and natural phenomena that involve ice.
History of hydrology – history of the study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water on Earth and other planets, including the hydrologic cycle, water resources and environmental watershed sustainability.
History of hydrogeology – history of the area of geology that deals with the distribution and movement of groundwater in the soil and rocks of the Earth's crust (commonly in aquifers).
History of mineralogy – history of the study of chemistry, crystal structure, and physical (including optical) properties of minerals.
History of meteorology – history of the interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere which explains and forecasts weather events.
History of oceanography – history of the branch of Earth science that studies the ocean
History of paleoclimatology – history of the study of changes in climate taken on the scale of the entire history of Earth
History of paleontology – history of the study of prehistoric life
History of petrology – history of the branch of geology that studies the origin, composition, distribution and structure of rocks.
History of limnology – history of the study of inland waters
History of seismology – history of the scientific study of earthquakes and the propagation of elastic waves through the Earth or through other planet-like bodies
History of soil science – history of the study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the earth including soil formation, classification and mapping; physical, chemical, biological, and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils.
History of topography – history of the study of surface shape and features of the Earth and other observable astronomical objects including planets, moons, and asteroids.
History of volcanology – history of the study of volcanoes, lava, magma, and related geological, geophysical and geochemical phenomena.
History of biology – history of the study of living organisms.
History of aerobiology – history of the study of airborne organic particles
History of agriculture – history of the study of producing crops from the land, with an emphasis on practical applications
History of anatomy – history of the study of form and function, in plants, animals, and other organisms, or specifically in humans
History of human anatomy – history of the scientific study of the morphology of the adult human.
History of astrobiology – history of the study of evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe—also known as exobiology, exopaleontology, and bioastronomy
History of biochemistry – history of the study of the chemical reactions required for life to exist and function, usually a focus on the cellular level
History of bioengineering – history of the study of biology through the means of engineering with an emphasis on applied knowledge and especially related to biotechnology
History of biogeography – history of the study of the distribution of species spatially and temporally
History of bioinformatics – history of the use of information technology for the study, collection, and storage of genomic and other biological data
History of biomathematics – history of the quantitative or mathematical study of biological processes, with an emphasis on modeling
History of biomechanics – history of the often considered a branch of medicine, the study of the mechanics of living beings, with an emphasis on applied use through prosthetics or orthotics
History of biomedical research – history of the study of the human body in health and disease
History of biophysics – history of the study of biological processes through physics, by applying the theories and methods traditionally used in the physical sciences
History of biotechnology – history of the new and sometimes controversial branch of biology that studies the manipulation of living matter, including genetic modification and synthetic biology
History of building biology – history of the study of the indoor living environment
History of botany – history of the study of plants
History of cell biology – history of the study of the cell as a complete unit, and the molecular and chemical interactions that occur within a living cell
History of conservation biology – history of the study of the preservation, protection, or restoration of the natural environment, natural ecosystems, vegetation, and wildlife
History of chronobiology – history of the field of biology that examines periodic (cyclic) phenomena in living organisms and their adaptation to solar- and lunar-related rhythms.
History of cryobiology – history of the study of the effects of lower than normally preferred temperatures on living beings.
History of developmental biology – history of the study of the processes through which an organism forms, from zygote to full structure
History of embryology – history of the study of the development of embryo (from fecundation to birth). See also topobiology.
History of gerontology – history of the study of aging processes.
History of ecology – history of the study of the interactions of living organisms with one another and with the non-living elements of their environment
History of environmental biology – history of the study of the natural world, as a whole or in a particular area, especially as affected by human activity
History of epidemiology – history of the major component of public health research, studying factors affecting the health of populations
History of evolution – history of the any change across successive generations in the heritable characteristics of biological populations.
History of evolutionary biology – history of the study of the origin and descent of species over time
History of evolutionary developmental biology – history of the field of biology that compares the developmental processes of different organisms to determine the ancestral relationship between them, and to discover how developmental processes evolved.
History of paleobiology – history of the discipline which combines the methods and findings of the natural science biology with the methods and findings of the earth science paleontology.
History of paleontology – history of the study of fossils and sometimes geographic evidence of prehistoric life
History of genetics – history of the study of genes and heredity
History of genomics – history of the discipline in genetics concerned with the study of the genomes of organisms.
History of proteomics – history of the large-scale study of proteins, particularly their structures and functions
History of population genetics – history of the study of changes in gene frequencies in
History of histology – history of the study of cells and tissues, a microscopic branch of anatomy
History of integrative biology – history of the study of whole organisms
History of limnology – history of the study of inland waters
History of marine biology – history of the study of ocean ecosystems, plants, animals, and other living beings
History of microbiology – history of the study of microscopic organisms (microorganisms) and their interactions with other living things
History of bacteriology – history of the study of bacteria.
History of virology – history of the study of viruses and some other virus-like agents
History of molecular biology – history of the study of biology and biological functions at the molecular level, some cross over with biochemistry
History of structural biology – history of the branch of molecular biology, biochemistry, and biophysics concerned with the molecular structure of biological macromolecules
History of morphology – history of the In biology, morphology is a branch of bioscience dealing with the study of the form and structure of organisms and their specific structural features.
History of mycology – history of the study of fungi
History of oceanography – history of the study of the ocean, including ocean life, environment, geography, weather, and other aspects influencing the ocean
History of oncology – history of the study of cancer processes, including virus or mutation oncogenesis, angiogenesis and tissues remoldings
History of population biology – history of the study of groups of conspecific organisms, including
History of population ecology – history of the study of how population dynamics and extinction
History of population genetics – history of the study of changes in gene frequencies in populations of organisms
Pathobiology or pathology – history of the study of diseases, and the causes, processes, nature, and development of disease
History of parasitology – history of the study of parasites and parasitism
History of pharmacology – history of the study and practical application of preparation, use, and effects of drugs and synthetic medicines
History of physiology – history of the study of the functioning of living organisms and the organs and parts of living organisms
History of immunology –
History of kinesiology – history of the Kinesiology, also known as human kinetics, is the scientific study of human movement
History of neurobiology – history of the study of the nervous system, including anatomy, physiology and pathology
History of neuroscience – history of the interdisciplinary science that studies the nervous system
History of histology –
History of phytopathology – history of the study of plant diseases (also called Plant Pathology)
History of psychobiology – history of the study of the biological bases of psychology
History of sociobiology – history of the study of the biological bases of sociology
History of systematics – history of the study of the diversification of living forms, both past and present, and the relationships among living things through time
History of cladistics – history of the method of classifying species of organisms into groups called clades, which consist of an ancestor organism and all its descendants (and nothing else)
History of phylogeny – history of the study of evolutionary relation among groups of organisms (e.g. species, populations), which is discovered through molecular sequencing data and morphological data matrices
History of taxonomy – history of the science of identifying and naming species, and arranging them into a classification.
History of zoology – history of the study of animals, including classification, physiology, development, and behavior
History of arachnology – history of the scientific study of spiders and related animals such as scorpions, pseudoscorpions, harvestmen, collectively called arachnids.
History of acarology – history of the study of the taxon of arachnids that contains mites and ticks
History of entomology – history of the study of insects
Timeline of entomology
History of myrmecology – history of the scientific study of ants, a branch of entomology
History of coleopterology – history of the study of beetles
History of lepidopterology – history of the study of a large order of insects that includes moths and butterflies (called lepidopterans)
History of ethology – history of the study of animal behavior
History of helminthology – history of the study of worms, especially parasitic worms
History of herpetology – history of the study of reptiles and amphibians
History of ichthyology – history of the study of fish
History of malacology – history of the branch of invertebrate zoology which deals with the study of the Mollusca (mollusks or molluscs), the second-largest phylum of animals in terms of described species after the arthropods.
History of mammalogy – history of the study of mammals
History of biological anthropology – history of the studies the physical development of the human species. Also called physical anthropology.
History of cetology – history of the branch of marine mammal science that studies the approximately eighty species of whales, dolphins, and porpoise in the scientific order Cetacea.
History of nematology – history of the scientific discipline concerned with the study of nematodes, or roundworms
History of ornithology – history of the study of birds

General natural science concepts
Discovery science
Empirical evidence
Experiment
Hypothesis
Laboratory
Nature
Occam's razor
Peer review
Physical law
Reproducibility
Scientific evidence
Scientific method
Scientific theory
Testability
Universe
Validity

Natural science organizations
Natural science publications
Physical science journals
List of astronomy journals
List of chemistry journals
List of earth and atmospheric sciences journals
List of physics journals
List of biology journals
List of botany journals
List of zoology journals

Persons influential in natural science
List of physicists
List of biophysicists
List of geophysicists
List of astronomers
List of cosmologists
List of chemists
List of biochemists
List of neurochemists
List of electrochemists
List of earth scientists
List of Russian earth scientists
List of cartographers
List of climatologists
List of geographers
List of geologists
List of geophysicists
List of glaciologists
List of mineralogists
List of meteorologists
List of paleontologists
List of soil scientists
List of biologists
List of botanists by author abbreviation
List of carcinologists
List of coleopterists
List of ecologists
List of malacologists
List of mammalogists
List of mycologists
List of ornithologists
List of pathologists
List of zoologists by author abbreviation
List of Nobel Prize winners in physiology or medicine

See also
Outline of science
Outline of natural science
Outline of physical science
Outline of earth science
Outline of formal science
Outline of social science
Outline of applied science

References
External links

The History of Recent Science and Technology
Natural Sciences Information on the Natural Sciences degree programme at Durham University.
Natural Sciences Contains updated information on research in the Natural Sciences including biology, geography and the applied life and earth sciences.
Natural Sciences Information on the Natural Sciences degree programme at the University of Bath which includes the Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Pharmacology, Physics and Environmental Studies.
Reviews of Books About Natural Science This site contains over 50 previously published reviews of books about natural science, plus selected essays on timely topics in natural science.
Scientific Grant Awards Database Contains details of over 2,000,000 scientific research projects conducted over the past 25 years.
Natural Sciences Tripos Provides information on the framework within which most of the natural science is taught at the University of Cambridge.
E!Science Up-to-date science news aggregator from major sources including universities.