The following outline is provided as an overview and topical guide to space science:
Space science – field that encompasses all of the scientific disciplines that involve space exploration and study natural phenomena and physical bodies occurring in outer space, such as space medicine and astrobiology.

Branches of space sciences
Astronomy
See astronomical object for a list of specific types of entities which scientists study.  See Earth's location in the universe for an orientation.

Subfields of astronomy:
Astrophysics – branch of astronomy that deals with the physics of the universe, including the physical properties of celestial objects, as well as their interactions and behavior. Among the objects studied are galaxies, stars, planets, exoplanets, the interstellar medium and the cosmic microwave background; and the properties examined include luminosity, density, temperature, and chemical composition. The subdisciplines of theoretical astrophysics are:
Computational astrophysics – The study of astrophysics using computational methods and tools to develop computational models.
Plasma astrophysics – studies properties of plasma in outer space.
Space physics – study of plasmas as they occur naturally in the Earth's upper atmosphere (aeronomy) and within the Solar System.
Solar physics – Sun and its interaction with the remainder of the Solar System and interstellar space.
Stellar astronomy – concerned with Star formation, physical properties, main sequence life span, variability, stellar evolution and extinction.
Galactic astronomy – deals with the structure and components of our galaxy and of other galaxies.
Extragalactic astronomy – study of objects (mainly galaxies) outside our galaxy, including Galaxy formation and evolution.
Cosmology
Physical cosmology – origin and evolution of the universe as a whole. The study of cosmology is theoretical astrophysics at its largest scale.
Chemical cosmology - study of the chemical composition of matter in the universe and the processes that led to those compositions.
Quantum cosmology – the study of cosmology through the use of quantum field theory to explain phenomena general relativity cannot due to limitations in its framework.
Planetary Science – study of planets, moons, and planetary systems.
Atmospheric science – study of atmospheres and weather.
Planetary geology
Planetary oceanography
Exoplanetology – various planets outside of the Solar System
Astrochemistry – studies the abundance and reactions of molecules in the Universe, and their interaction with radiation.Interdisciplinary studies of astronomy:
Astrobiology – studies the advent and evolution of biological systems in the universe.
Space biology – studies to build a better understanding of how spaceflight affects living systems in spacecraft, or in ground-based experiments that mimic aspects of spaceflight
Space chemistry – Reactions of elements to form more complex compounds, such as amino acids, are key to the study of chemistry in space.Astrobotany – Sub-discipline of botany that is the study of plants in space environments.
Archaeoastronomy – studies ancient or traditional astronomies in their cultural context, utilizing archaeological and anthropological evidence.
Space archaeology – the study of human artifacts in outer space
Forensic astronomy – the use of astronomy, the scientific study of celestial objects, to determine the appearance of the sky at specific times in the past.Techniques used in astronomical research:
Theoretical astronomy – mathematical modelling of celestial entities and phenomena
Astrometry – study of the position of objects in the sky and their changes of position. Defines the system of coordinates used and the kinematics of objects in our galaxy.
Photometry – study of how bright celestial objects are when passed through different filters
Spectroscopy – study of the spectra of astronomical objects
Observational astronomy – practice of observing celestial objects by using telescopes and other astronomical apparatus. Observatories on the ground as well as space observatories take measurements of celestial entities and phenomena. It is concerned with recording data. The subdisciplines of observational astronomy are generally made by the specifications of the detectors:
Radio astronomy –  >300 µm
Submillimetre astronomy – 200 µm to 1 mm
Infrared astronomy – 0.7–350 µm
Optical astronomy – 380–750 nm
Ultraviolet astronomy – 10–320 nm
High-energy astronomy
X-ray astronomy – 0.01–10 nm
Gamma-ray astronomy – <0.01 nm
Neutrino astronomy – Neutrinos
Gravitational wave astronomy – Gravitons

Astronautics
The science and engineering of spacefaring and spaceflight, a subset of Aerospace engineering (which includes atmospheric flight)

Space technology is technology for use in outer space, in travel or other activities beyond Earth's atmosphere, for purposes such as spaceflight, space exploration, and Earth observation.
Spaceflight
Human spaceflight
Outline of space exploration
Space architecture
Life-support system
Space station
Space Habitation ModuleLife in space
Bioastronautics
Animals in space
Microorganisms tested in outer space
Plants in space
Humans in space
Women in space
Effect of spaceflight on the human body
Sleep in space
Food in space
Medicine in space
Neuroscience in space
Writing in space

See also
Space Sciences Laboratory – research facility at the University of California, BerkeleyPages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback – University of California, Berkeley
Space-based economy – Economic activity in space
Commercial use of space – General space-related commerce
Space manufacturing – Production of manufactured goods in an environment outside a planetary atmosphere
Space tourism – Space travel for recreational purposes
Space warfare – Combat that takes place in outer space
Alien invasion – Common theme in science fiction stories and film
Asteroid-impact avoidance – Methods to prevent destructive asteroid hitsPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Space law – Area of national and international law governing activities in outer space
Remote sensing – Acquisition of information at a significant distance from the subject
Planetarium – Theatre that presents educational and entertaining shows about astronomy
Centennial Challenges – NASA space competition inducement prize contests NASA prize contests
Space and survival – Idea that long-term human presence requires to be spacefaring
Space colonization – Concept of permanent human habitation outside of Earth
Space industry – Activities related to manufacturing components that go into Earth's orbit or beyond
Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes
Batteries in space
Control engineering – Engineering discipline that deals with control systems
Corrosion in space – Corrosion of materials occurring in outer space
Nuclear power in space – Space exploration using nuclear energy
Observatories in space – Instrument in space to study astronomical objectsPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Orbital mechanics – Field of classical mechanics concerned with the motion of spacecraft
Robotic spacecraft – Spacecraft without people on boardPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Space environment – Study of how space conditions affect spacecraft
Space logistics – Logistics for space travel
Space technology – Technology developed for use in Space exploration
Space-based radar – Use of radar systems mounted on satellites
Space-based solar power – Concept of collecting solar power in outer space and distributing it to Earth
Spacecraft design – for launch vehicles and satellites
Spacecraft propulsion – Method used to accelerate spacecraft

References
External links

Institute of Space Technology, Pakistan
Space Sciences @ NASA
Space Sciences @ ESA
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Space Sciences Institute
Space Science & Technology (in Persian) – an Iranian nongovernmental group who writes scientific articles about Space Science & Technology