Acharya Pingala (Sanskrit: पिङ्गल, romanized: Piṅgala; c. 3rd–2nd century BCE) was an ancient Indian poet and mathematician, and the author of the Chandaḥśāstra (Sanskrit: छन्दःशास्त्र, lit. 'A Treatise on Prosody'), also called the Pingala-sutras (Sanskrit: पिङ्गलसूत्राः, romanized: Piṅgalasūtrāḥ, lit. 'Pingala's Threads of Knowledge'), the earliest known treatise on Sanskrit prosody.The Chandaḥśāstra is a work of eight chapters in the late Sūtra style, not fully comprehensible without a commentary. It has been dated to the last few centuries BCE. In the 10th century CE, Halayudha wrote a commentary elaborating on the Chandaḥśāstra. According to some historians Maharshi Pingala was the brother of Pāṇini, the famous Sanskrit grammarian, considered the first descriptive linguist. Another think tank identifies him as Patanjali, the 2nd century CE scholar who authored Mahabhashya.

Combinatorics
The Chandaḥśāstra presents systematic enumeration of metres with fixed patterns of short and long syllables using a binary representation. Pingala's work also includes material related to the Fibonacci numbers, called mātrāmeru. 
Pingala is credited with the use of light (laghu) and heavy (guru) syllables to describe combinatorics of Sanskrit metre. Because of this, Pingala is sometimes also credited with the first use of zero, as he used the Sanskrit word śūnya to explicitly refer to the number. Pingala's binary representation increases towards the right, and not to the left as modern binary numbers usually do. In Pingala's system, the numbers start from number one, and not zero. Four short syllables "0000" is the first pattern and corresponds to the value one. The numerical value is obtained by adding one to the sum of place values.

Editions
A. Weber, Indische Studien 8, Leipzig, 1863.

Notes
See also
References
Amulya Kumar Bag, 'Binomial theorem in ancient India', Indian J. Hist. Sci. 1 (1966), 68–74.
George Gheverghese Joseph (2000). The Crest of the Peacock, p. 254, 355. Princeton University Press.
Klaus Mylius, Geschichte der altindischen Literatur, Wiesbaden (1983).
Van Nooten, B. (1993-03-01). "Binary numbers in Indian antiquity". Journal of Indian Philosophy. 21 (1): 31–50. doi:10.1007/BF01092744. S2CID 171039636.

External links
Math for Poets and Drummers,  Rachel W. Hall, Saint Joseph's University, 2005.
Mathematics of Poetry,  Rachel W. Hall