This is a list of operating systems specifically focused on security. Similar concepts include security-evaluated operating systems that have achieved certification from an auditing organization, and trusted operating systems that provide sufficient support for multilevel security and evidence of correctness to meet a particular set of requirements.

Linux
Android-based
CalyxOS is designed for privacy, security, and accessibility.
DivestOS is a fork of LineageOS that aims to increase privacy and security.
GrapheneOS is a privacy and security-focused mobile operating system for selected Google Pixel smartphones and tablets.
Kali NetHunter is a mobile penetration testing platform based on Kali Linux.

Arch-based
BlackArch is a penetration testing distribution that provides a large number of security tools.

Debian-based
Kali Linux is designed for digital forensics and penetration testing.
Parrot OS Security Edition is designed for penetration testing, vulnerability assessment and mitigation, computer forensics, and anonymous web browsing.
Tails is aimed at preserving privacy and anonymity.
Whonix consists of two virtual machines. All communications are forced through Tor.

Gentoo-based
Pentoo is a Live CD and Live USB designed for penetration testing and security assessment.

Other Linux distributions
Alpine Linux is designed to be small, simple, and secure. It uses musl, BusyBox, and OpenRC instead of the more commonly used glibc, GNU Core Utilities, and systemd.
Fedora Silverblue is an immutable desktop operating system. Every Silverblue installation is identical to every other installation of the same version, and it never changes as it is used.

BSD
OpenBSD is a Unix-like operating system that emphasizes portability, standardization, correctness, proactive security, and integrated cryptography.

Xen
Qubes OS aims to provide security through isolation. Isolation is provided through the use of virtualization technology. This allows the segmentation of applications into secure virtual machines.

See also


== References ==