A system on a module (SoM) is a board-level circuit that integrates a system function in a single module. It may integrate digital and analog functions on a single board.  A typical application is in the area of embedded systems. Unlike a single-board computer, a SoM serves a special function like a system on a chip (SoC). The devices integrated in the SoM typically requires a high level of interconnection for reasons such as speed, timing, bus width etc.. There are benefits in building a SoM, as for SoC; one notable result is to reduce the cost of the base board or the main PCB.  Two other major advantages of SoMs are design-reuse and that they can be integrated into many embedded computer applications.

History
The acronym SoM has its roots in the blade-based modules. In the mid 1980s, when VMEbus blades used M-Modules, these were commonly referred to as system On a module (SoM). These SoMs performed specific functions such as compute functions and data acquisition functions. SoMs were used extensively by Sun Microsystems, Motorola, Xerox, DEC, and IBM in their blade computers.

Design
A typical SoM consists of:

at least one microcontroller, microprocessor or digital signal processor (DSP) core
multiprocessor systems-on-chip (MPSoCs) have more than one processor core
memory blocks including a selection of ROM, RAM, EEPROM and/or flash memory
timing sources
industry standard communication interfaces such as USB, FireWire, Ethernet, USART, SPI, I²C
peripherals including counter-timers, real-time timers and power-on reset generators
analog interfaces including analog-to-digital converters and digital-to-analog converters
voltage regulators and power management circuits

See also
CompactPCI – Computer bus interconnect for industrial computers
Futurebus – Universal computer bus standard
PCI Mezzanine Card – Printed circuit board assembly manufactured to the IEEE P1386.1 standard
VPX – Standards for connecting components of a computer
VXS – VMEbus performance improvement standard


== References ==