Systems design interfaces, and data for an electronic control system to satisfy specified requirements. System design could be seen as the application of system theory to product development. There is some overlap with the disciplines of system analysis, system architecture and system engineering.

Overview
If the broader topic of product development "blends the perspective of marketing, design, and manufacturing into a single approach to product development," then design is the act of taking the marketing information and creating the design of the product to be manufactured. Systems design is therefore the process of defining and developing systems to satisfy specified requirements of the user.
The basic study of system design is the understanding of component parts and their subsequent interaction with one another.

Physical design
The physical design relates to the actual input and output processes of the system. This is explained in terms of how data is input into a system, how it is verified/authenticated, how it is processed, and how it is displayed.
In physical design, the following requirements about the system are decided.

Input requirement,
Output requirements,
Storage requirements,
Processing requirements,
System control and backup or recovery.Put another way, the physical portion of system design can generally be broken down into three sub-tasks:

User Interface Design
Data Design
Process Design

Web System design
Online websites, such as Google, Twitter, Facebook, Amazon and Netflix are used by millions of users worldwide. A scalable, highly available system must be designed to accommodate an increasing number of users. Here are the things to consider in designing the system:

Functional and non functional requirements
Capacity estimation
Database to use, Relational or NoSQL
Vertical scaling, Horizontal scaling, Sharding
Load Balancing
Primary-secondary Replication
Cache and CDN
Stateless and Stateful servers
Data center georouting
Message Queue, Publish Subscribe Architecture
Performance Metrics Monitoring and Logging
Build, test, configure deploy automation
Finding single point of failure
API Rate limiting
Service Level Agreement

See also
References
Further reading
Bentley, Lonnie D., Kevin C. Dittman, and Jeffrey L. Whitten. System analysis and design methods. (1986, 1997, 2004).
C. West Churchman (1971). The Design of Inquiring Systems: Basic Concepts of Systems and Organization. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-01608-1.
William Gosling (1962). The design of engineering systems. New York: Wiley.
Hawryszkiewycz, Igor T. Introduction to system analysis and design. Prentice Hall PTR, 1994.
Levin, Mark Sh. Modular system design and evaluation. Springer, 2015.
Maier, Mark W.; Rechtin, Eberhardt (2000). The Art of System Architecting (Second ed.). Boca Raton: CRC Press.
J. H. Saltzer; D. P. Reed; D. D. Clark (1 November 1984). "End-to-end arguments in system design" (PDF). ACM Transactions on Computer Systems. 2 (4): 277–288. doi:10.1145/357401.357402. ISSN 0734-2071. S2CID 215746877. Wikidata Q56503280.
Ulrich, Karl T.; Eppinger, Steven D. (2000). Product Design and Development (Second ed.). Boston: Irwin McGraw-Hill.
Whitten, Jeffrey L.; Bentley, Lonnie D.; Dittman, Kevin C. (2004). Fundamentals of system analysis and design methods.

External links

Interactive System Design. Course by Chris Johnson, 1993
[1] Course by Prof. Birgit Weller, 2020