Do we need Template:Operating system and Template:OS, isn't the first template enough? --Cic (talk) 13:24, 14 July 2009 (UTC)

I think we need both. Template:Operating system is made for articles about specific operating systems (Windows, Linux...). Template:OS is for the general elements of ANY operating system. If anything it may be questioned to rename one of them. Sorry for not having any proposal ;-). --Farthen (talk) 15:07, 3 January 2010 (UTC)
This template is supposedly for *any* operating system.  The list of "Common features" should list "User interface", not "Graphical user interface", since not all operating systems (not even today, and certainly not historically) include a GUI. Yeng-Wang-Yeh (talk) 14:58, 22 January 2010 (UTC)

The very common arrangement in the four layers: (1. hardware, 2. kernel, 3. application, 4. user) is, if we look at it from the right angle, misleading. As a matter of fact, the user ALWAYS interacts with some kind of hardware, and not with an application. It is of course correct, that the applications have some interface, be this a CLI, a TUI or a GUI, that is meant for the user to interact with. But this again, is presented to the user via hardware, be it the monitor or a refreshable braille display. My point is, that before any data arrives at these peripherals, it is processed by the hardware, e.g. the graphics card, and before that, it traverses the kernel. Have a look at my two schemes:

The scientific field of physical ergonomics deals with the design of the Human-machine interface, the computer hardware peripherals, while cognitive ergonomics deals with the e.g. with the GUI of a desktop environment or some software and its underlying concepts. DO NOT use my schemes, since they are, by choice, Linux kernel-specific! But please DO think about an OS, any OS, from this different point of view. It illustrates how the employed HMI dictates the possibilities of the user to interact with his software, and also, how the kernel can be a bottle neck, since BOTH, the input from the user, and then the answer from the software, traverse the kernel. User:ScotXWt@lk 20:30, 4 June 2014 (UTC)

Should there be a distinction between a "user written procedure" and an application that it is distributed with the O/S for example file maintenance utilities tightly coupled to a file system and the O/S.
Actually should there be a "file system" layer between the O/S and the hardware??
DGerman (talk) 21:39, 11 May 2021 (UTC)