I have deleted Headphones as an output device because headphones are not a basic computer component. A headphone jack is, though. Binksternet (talk) 19:42, 7 November 2009 (UTC)

When I went through computer class, an output device was defined as something that interprets signals from the computer and converts them to signals a human can understand. A headphone jack is nothing more than a port/connective device. By that logic, 1) speakers wouldn't be considered output devices since they plug into the same jack, and 2) essentially all ports/jacks would be considered output devices and not the things that plug into them (like a monitor). Also, by extension, the mouse and keyboard wouldn't be input devices; either their plugs or the ports they plug into would be. See what I'm saying?--Ridge Runner (talk) 19:51, 7 November 2009 (UTC)
Also, here are two definitions of an output device.--Ridge Runner (talk) 19:56, 7 November 2009 (UTC)This reference supports your assertion that a printer is a computer output device. A similar reference affirms this distinction about printers but does not have the word headphones at all in its section about "Computer output devices." The reason I'm using Google books for refs is that dictionary.reference.com is not very reliable.
What are "basic computer components? You have set up a difficult argument in that your "Basic computer components" pipes to Personal computer hardware, a completely different definition and an article that does not mention headphones... Are headphones "basic"? Are removable storage devices "basic"? Binksternet (talk) 20:12, 7 November 2009 (UTC)
I do concert and event sound for a living. I've connected my laptop's headphone jack to a huge concert sound system, and I've connected it to a live internet streaming broadcast. Is a concert sound system a computer output device? Is the internet a computer output device? At concerts and in the home, how about video projectors? LED walls at sports and concerts? Huget LED advertising screens on the side of the highway? Binksternet (talk) 20:19, 7 November 2009 (UTC)Could you please explain why you think dictionary.com is unreliable? They cite all of their sources and get their definitions from reputable dictionaries. As for headphones, that's covered under speaker/loudspeaker - the only difference between headphones and regular speakers is one goes on your head.
If you would go back and look at the edit summaries, you would see why the title links to where it does. If you have a better title for this template, then please share it. Just to add, computer hardware would probably be a better title, but I didn't think of it until after I had already completed this template.
Yes, when connected to your computer, all of those things are output devices.--Ridge Runner (talk) 20:27, 7 November 2009 (UTC)Maybe it would help if I clarified the reason I put basic in the title. I was attempting to make a basic list of things a computer will use. The reason I included headphones in this list is if you buy a cheap computer that doesn't come with speakers or you have a laptop, odds are pretty good that you'll use a pair of headphones. Does that help any?--Ridge Runner (talk) 20:46, 7 November 2009 (UTC)To help you achieve your end, perhaps the word "common" could be used in place of "basic". Binksternet (talk) 21:34, 7 November 2009 (UTC)There is a distinction between devices and their hardware means of attachment to a computer; the hardware means typically called an adapter or controller.  Thus the HDD is a device but it was attached originally thru a controller and now is attached thru an Host Bus Adapter which is in the South Bridge.  Similarly, I think headphones and speakers are devices that are attached thru an audio adapter, also now, I think, in the South Bridge.  The headphone jack is not a device just as the SATA connector on the motherboard that connects to the HDD is not a device.   Perhaps the template should state "speakers and/or headphones."  I have no problem with the term basic, but I do think the template is more reflective of a Personal Computer than computers in general. Tom94022 (talk) 01:23, 9 November 2009 (UTC)
Why is Thunderbolt included in the Data Ports section? As of 2013-01, it hasn't been around for more than two years. Listing along USB, RS232 is wishful thinking regarding it's longevity at best, advertisement at worst.  Andorxor (talk) 01:32, 5 January 2013 (UTC)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Thunderbolt-compatible_devices  — Preceding unsigned comment added by 46.10.229.1 (talk) 23:07, 30 April 2014 (UTC) 

If Joystick is in the list of input devices, then Gamepad should be too, I think. —  Ark25  (talk) 07:26, 24 May 2014 (UTC)

Although this template is used in articles on older computers, it appears to be limited to modern personal computers. Also, BIOS is software; the hardware in which it resides, e.g., ROM, PROM, should be listed instead and perhaps a Preinstalled firmware line be added. Serial ports are used for fax modems and listing them is obsolete is questionable at best. Things missing include

Channels
IBM 6 bit channels for 70xx computers
IBM 8 bit channels for 70xx computers
Bus and Tag
ESCON
FICON
Cabinets
Channels
CPU
Power supply
RAM
Racks
Same as cabinets
Core memory
joystick
Magnetic cards
Magnetic drums
Magnetic stripe cards
Magnetic tape
punched cardsThe template is inconsistent as to the endpoints that are considered part of the computer, e.g., diskpack is listed but speaker is not. Perhaps there should be a separate line for equipment that is not considered part of the computer but is attached to or mounted on it.
Older computers often had separate cabinets for, e.g., channels, cooling, CPU. power. There were a variety of mass storage media including magnetic cards in a magazine and magnetic strips in a magazine. -- Shmuel (Seymour J.) Metz Username:Chatul (talk) 14:36, 2 November 2022 (UTC) -- revised 15:07, 2 November 2022 (UTC)