There are about 30 trillion (3×1013) human cells in the adult human body, varying from about 20 to 40 trillion depending on the sex, age and weight, and a roughly equal number of bacterial cells. The human cells have been categorized into over 400 cell types based on location and function within the body, of which about 230 types are listed here. There are many different types of cells in the human body.

Major efforts to map all human cells
Several efforts have been made to make a list or a map of all human cells. One of the largest and most recent is the HuBMAP (Human BioMolecular Atlas Program). They managed to organize 1551 samples across 17 collections. However, this project still only mapped about 31 of the human bodies' 70 organs. Their datasets and visualisations place great emphasis on biomarkers and location in the body, but less on cell development and how cells can change over time. Usually specific surface proteins are used to identify cells, and based on this they are put into different categories. Another major effort to make an overview of these proteins that allows us to observe cell types is the Swedish Protein Atlas.The EU have attempted to map everything in the human brain, however a lot of the areas in the model which is currently available does not have cellular resolution available.

Complete lists of human cells known so far
Cells derived primarily from endoderm
The endodermal cells primarily generate the lining and glands of the digestive tube

Cells derived primarily from ectoderm
Nervous system
There are nerve cells, also known as neurons, present in our human body. They are branched out. These cells make up nervous tissue.
A neuron consists of a cell body with a nucleus and cytoplasm, from which long thin hair-like parts arise.

Central nervous system neurons and glial cells
(large variety of types, still poorly classified)

Cells derived primarily from mesoderm
Note: Cephalic connective tissue and bones are derived from the Cranial neural crest which comes from the ectoderm germ layer

List of databases relevant to this list
See also
Human Cell Tree Map
List of human cell types derived from the germ layers

References
External links

Human Cell Tree Map
Human Cell Atlas