The Variant Call Format (VCF) is a standard text file format used in bioinformatics for storing gene sequence variations. The format was developed in 2010 for the 1000 Genomes Project and has since been used by other large-scale genotyping and DNA sequencing projects. VCF is a common output format for variant calling programs due to its relative simplicity and scalability. Many tools have been developed for editing and manipulating VCF files, including VCFtools, which was released in conjunction with the VCF format in 2011, and BCFtools, which was included as part of SAMtools until being split into an independent package in 2014.The standard is currently in version 4.3, although the 1000 Genomes Project has developed its own specification for structural variations such as duplications, which are not easily accommodated into the existing schema.Additional file formats have been developed based on VCF, including genomic VCF (gVCF). gVCF is an extended format which includes additional information about "blocks" that match the reference and their qualities.

Example
The VCF header
The header begins the file and provides metadata describing the body of the file. Header lines are denoted as starting with #. Special keywords in the header are denoted with ##. Recommended keywords include fileformat, fileDate and reference.
The header contains keywords that optionally semantically and syntactically describe the fields used in the body of the file, notably INFO, FILTER, and FORMAT (see below).

The columns of a VCF
The body of VCF follows the header, and is tab separated into 8 mandatory columns and an unlimited number of optional columns that may be used to record other information about the sample(s). When additional columns are used, the first optional column is used to describe the format of the data in the columns that follow.

Common INFO fields
Arbitrary keys are permitted, although the following sub-fields are reserved (albeit optional):
Any other info fields are defined in the .vcf header.

Common FORMAT fields
Any other format fields are defined in the .vcf header.

See also
The FASTA format, used to represent genome sequences.
The FASTQ format, used to represent DNA sequencer reads along with quality scores.
The SAM format, used to represent genome sequencer reads that have been aligned to genome sequences.
The GVF format (Genome Variation Format), an extension based on the GFF3 format.Global Alliance for Genomics and Health (GA4GH), the group leading the management and expansion of the VCF format. The VCF specification is no longer maintained by the 1000 Genomes Project.Human genome
Human genetic variation
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP)

References
External links
An explanation of the format in picture form
VCFtools
BCFtools